Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Government Information Quarterly
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/govinf
Close encounters of the digital kind: A research agenda for the digitalization
of public services
Ida Lindgrena,⁎
, Christian Østergaard Madsenb
, Sara Hofmannc
, Ulf Melina
a Linköping University, Department of Management and Engineering, Sweden
b IT University Copenhagen, Department of Computer Science, Denmark
c University of Agder, Department of Information Systems, Norway
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Citizen–government interaction
Digitalization
Theory-building
Public service
ABSTRACT
This paper contributes to e-government research by presenting a review and discussion on how digitalization of
public services has affected the interaction between citizens and government. We argue for a conceptualization
and critical reflection on the nature of the underlying interaction between citizens and public officials - the public
encounter - that digital public services are developed to support. We apply a qualitative and hermeneutic approach and illustrate that digital public services change public encounters concerning when, where, and how
interactions occur, what each actor does, and the skills required of them. By relating these changes to emerging
digital technologies (e.g. data mining, machine learning, sensor technology, and service automation), we illustrate that while these new technologies carry the potential to further digitalize service provision and fulfill the
democratic goals of digital government, authorities can apply the same technology to restrict, control, and
surveil citizens. Based on a critical discussion on what digitalization might entail for society, we identify problem
areas arising from this development and propose a research agenda for understanding this phenomenon further.
We raise questions and ethical concerns regarding accountability and reskilling of citizens and public officials as
public service provision becomes citizen self-service.
1. Introduction and background
Public organizations worldwide are adopting digital technologies to
support the public encounter; the interaction between citizens and public
officials (Goodsell, 1981). New opportunities for digitalization of public
service provision associated with data mining, machine learning, sensor
technology, and service automation have been discussed with great
curiosity and optimism by scholars and policymakers alike (Matheus,
Janssen, & Maheshwari, 2018; European Commission, 2016). These
emerging digital technologies may fulfill the primary goals for digital
government, which include improving efficiency and service quality by
reducing service lead times, increasing transparency, and offering
seamless service provision across organizations (cf. Layne & Lee, 2001).
Rapid technological development and the drive of policy makers towards automatization and digital self-service make it imperative for egovernment scholars to understand how digitalization influences the
interaction between citizens and public authorities in the context of
public service provision.
Within e-government, the digitalization of public services has been
studied in areas such as design (Grimsley & Meehan, 2007), channel
choice (Ebbers, Pieterson, & Noordman, 2008), the digital divide
(Ebbers, Janssen, & Van Deursen, 2016; Helbig, Gil-García, & Ferro,
2009), and value creation (Nielsen & Persson, 2017). However, few
researchers have addressed the consequences of digitalization for one of
the core activities at hand—the interaction between citizens and public
officials. This gap has been observed both at the empirical and theoretical level. Numerous empirical studies have been conducted on egovernment diffusion among government organizations (West, 2004;
Norris & Reddick, 2013) and citizens' willingness to adopt e-government services (Hofmann, Räckers, & Becker, 2012). However, such
adoption studies often treat digital public services either as hypothetic
or generic phenomena, thereby ignoring the context and diversity of eservices and their importance for citizens (Hofmann et al., 2012;
Madsen, Berger, & Phythian, 2014). Furthermore, scholars rarely go
beyond the point of adoption, mostly studying e-services from either
the organizational or citizen perspective rather than analyzing the interaction occurring directly between governments and citizens (Madsen
& Kræmmergaard, 2015a). Additionally, literature reviews have repeatedly called for more native theory development within e-government (Bannister & Connolly, 2015; Heeks & Bailur, 2007) and holistic
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2019.03.002
Received 31 August 2018; Received in revised form 1 March 2019; Accepted 1 March 2019
⁎ Corresponding author at: Linköping University, Department of Management and Engineering, SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden.
E-mail addresses: ida.lindgren@liu.se (I. Lindgren), chrm@itu.dk (C.Ø. Madsen), sara.hofmann@uia.no (S. Hofmann), ulf.melin@liu.se (U. Melin).
Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 427–436
Available online 12 March 2019
0740-624X/ © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).
T
studies of the interplay between systems and individuals (Meijer &
Bekkers, 2015).
Hence, both empirical and theoretical gaps exist in the e-government literature concerning how digitalization influences public services. The present study addresses this gap by analyzing the interaction
between citizens and public authorities in relation to digital public services; i.e., public services provided or mediated through internet-based
technology (Jansen & Ølnes, 2016; Lindgren & Jansson, 2013). In order
to advance our understanding of the interaction between citizens and
public organizations, this paper departs from the notion of the public
encounter defined by Goodsell (1981, p. 4) as “the interaction of citizen
and official as they communicate to conduct business”. We claim that
digitalization has altered the underlying conditions for public encounters and call for the analysis and conceptualization of how the
digitalization of public services has affected, and continues to affect, the
interaction between citizens and public authorities. For this purpose,
the aim of this paper is to discuss the possible consequences of digital
public services for the public encounter and propose a research agenda
for studying this phenomenon further. The research questions guiding
our work are: (1) How has digitalization of public services affected the
public encounter? (2) What are the unaddressed research areas concerning the digitalization of the public encounter?
The present study is important for a number of reasons. First, we
contribute to e-government research by presenting a theoretical framework for understanding the public encounter and discussing how
digital public services can affect the interactions between citizens and
governments. We further contribute to a critical discussion on what
digitalization of public services might entail for society by raising
questions and ethical concerns regarding the accountability and reskilling of citizens and public officials as digital public service provision
evolves.
This paper is organized in the following manner. In the second
section, we present our qualitative and hermeneutic research approach.
In the third section, we describe the characteristics of the traditional
public encounter. In the fourth section, the results of our literature
review are presented, relating the digitalization of public services to
four aspects of the public encounter: (1) its nature and purpose; (2) its
communication forms and settings; (3) the central actors involved; and
(4) its initiation, duration, and scope. Based on these discussions, we
return to our research question in the fifth section and conclude with a
discussion on the main issues, summarizing these in a research agenda
for future research on this topic. In the sixth and last section, some final
comments and limitations regarding this work are discussed.
2. Research approach
This paper is conceptually oriented and applies a qualitative and
hermeneutic research approach (Klein & Myers, 1999). As initially
stated, this paper rests on the underlying assumption that the accelerated digitalization of public services affects or even changes the
logic and nature of the public encounter. Digitalization can be understood as “a sociotechnical process of applying digitizing technologies to
broader social and institutional contexts”, where digitizing refers to “a
technical process of converting analogue signals into a digital form”
(Tilson, Lyytinen, & Sørensen, 2010, p. 749). Hence, we perceive the
digital interaction between the citizen and the public official as being
part of a sociotechnical system (Trist, 1981), where digitalization requires particular prerequisites and enables outcomes in both technical
and social aspects of the system (Henman, 2010).
Following the hermeneutic methodology suggested by Boell and
Cecez- Kecmanovic (2014), we conducted a literature review based on
the principles of the hermeneutic circle for analysis and interpretation.
This is a circular approach that involves the following iterative steps:
(1) reading; (2) mapping and classifying; (3) critical assessment; (4)
argument development; (5) research problem/questions; and (6)
searching (see Boell and Cecez- Kecmanovic (2014) for further details).
This approach acknowledges that the researcher has accumulated
knowledge and experience that can be used as a starting point for the
review process. By reading (1) scientific papers on the chosen topic in a
systematic and analytical manner, the researcher can classify relevant
ideas, findings, and contributions within a body of literature. Thereafter, classification and mapping (2) can be performed using various
types of analytical tools. In our case, we used the framework presented
by Goodsell (1981) as a conceptual framework guiding the analysis (we
motivate our choice of framework below). The following step involves a
critical assessment (3) and evaluation of the state of knowledge in relation to the studied topic. Building on this assessment, problems in the
established knowledge are identified and arguments (4) for a research
gap are developed. These arguments, in turn, can be formulated in research questions or problem areas (5) for further study. Intertwined
with these steps is the continuous search (6) for additional literature
that can inform the analysis and understanding of the phenomenon at
hand.
In line with Boell and Cecez- Kecmanovic (2014), we read and
searched for work on the digitalization of public services and the public
encounter in an iterative and reflexive manner (Alvesson & Sköldberg,
2009). The search for literature was inherently intertwined with its
analysis and interpretation, and guided by our research questions. We
began our search in the e-government research field, and expanded the
search to public administration, and information systems—the fields
from which e-government research originated (Heeks & Bailur, 2007).
Concerning the classification and mapping of literature, we found
several conceptualizations of potential interest to our study from the egovernment and public administration field that could serve as analytical tools. These included the public encounter (Goodsell, 1981),
evaluation and satisfaction with the bureaucratic encounter (Katz,
Gutek, Kahn, & Barton, 1975), the activities involved in ‘the processing
of people’ (Hasenfeld, Rafferty, & Zald, 1987), the service encounter
(Giesbrecht, Schwabe, & Schenk, 2017), and established discussions of
street-level bureaucracy and discretion (Bovens & Zouridis, 2002; Busch
& Henriksen, 2018; Lipsky, 2010). We also identified studies of service
and consumer encounters in the private sector of e-commerce (Meuter,
Ostrom, Roundtree, & Bitner, 2000; Moody, Lowry, & Galletta, 2017;
Pelet & Papadopoulou, 2012; Piccoli, 2016) discussing self-service, affordance, trust, website design, and values. We chose Goodsell's (1981)
conceptualization of the public encounter as the analytical tool for our
work because we found it to be the most suited to answer our first
research question: How has digitalization of public services affected the
public encounter? Our interpretation of Goodsell's framework is presented in Section Three. While Goodsell's work is relatively unknown
within e-government research, it is often applied within the fields of
public administration and political science. Applying Goodsell's framework is applicable to this study for several reasons. Unlike the
aforementioned scholars, Goodsell presents an explicit definition of the
public encounter as a concept. Additionally, he presents four general
dimensions of the public encounter. These are worthy of further investigation and theory building as they represent a starting point that
allows us to examine each dimension in relation to how it is affected by
digitization. Finally, Goodsell presented his definition of the public
encounter in 1981, decades prior to digital self-service applications
being developed. This conceptualization of the traditional analogue
public encounter serves as a conceptually robust starting point for investigating and analyzing the public encounter ‘before’ and ‘after’ digitalization. However, we do not claim that Goodsell (1981) represents
all of the previous work related to the public encounter. The aforementioned conceptualizations may—and have—been applied to study
other aspects of the encounter. However, they are not as useful for our
research since they are concerned with particular aspects surrounding
the encounter rather than the encounter itself.
Building on a critical assessment of the identified literature, we
strived to find coherent arguments and distill problems areas concerning digitalization of public services as a means to answer our
I. Lindgren, et al. Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 427–436
428
second research question: What are the unaddressed research areas concerning the digitalization of the public encounter? The synthesized outcome
of our interpretation and analysis of the literature is presented in
Section 4. In addition, identified problem areas are presented in Section
4 and subsequently discussed in terms of a suggested research agenda in
Section 5. With this research agenda, we call for further work to expand
our e-government research community's body of knowledge. Following
Gregor (2006), our arguments and proposed research agenda serves as
the core of a theory for analysis, explanation, and prediction of how and
why the digitalization of public services has affected—and will continue to affect—the public encounter.
3. Understanding the traditional public encounter
We use the concept of public encounter, as conceptualized by
Goodsell (1981), as our point of departure. The public encounter serves
as a baseline for understanding the stereotypical traditional analogue
public encounter, and thus provides a starting point for investigating
and analyzing the public encounter ‘before’ and ‘after’ digitalization.
Goodsell (1981) defines the public encounter as “the interaction of citizen and official as they communicate to conduct business” (p. 4) and
proceeds to outline and delimit four general aspects of the encounter:
(1) the nature and purpose of the encounter;
(2) the communication form(s) and setting(s) in which the encounter
occurs;
(3) the central actors involved; and
(4) the encounters' initiation, duration, and scope.
We will briefly outline these four general aspects of the public encounter below.
Concerning the nature and purpose of the public encounter, the public
encounter covers the purposive and dyadic interpersonal interaction
between a private citizen and a government official. This interaction
occurs to meet a specific end and is neither random nor accidental. The
“public” refers to the specific setting of the encounter, implying that
citizens are members of the “public” and that they interact with government officials (and not members of private organizations). Goodsell
focuses on citizens' interactions with “executive or administrative personnel” (Goodsell, 1981, p. 5) in relation to administrative services,
such as tax collection or public benefits. Areas pertaining to politics
such as voting, lobbying, asking citizens for advice, and generally interacting with elected officials are excluded, as is interaction with the
judicial system (judges). Goodsell (1981) divides the purpose of public
encounters into three broad categories:
• The exchange of information, such as citizens inquiring about public
services or government employees conducting census studies.
• The provision of public services, either by citizen request or through
outreach programs.
• Control or constraint, which is typically initiated by government. This
category pertains to interactions intended to limit or restrict citizens'
behavior (e.g., imposing penalties and tax collection).
The second aspect concerns the communication forms and settings of
the public encounter. Goodsell (1981) presents different types of media
and settings (or communication channels) where an encounter may
occur: face-to-face, letters, telephone, or a combination. While the encounter typically takes place in an official setting such as a government
agency, it can also occur in the citizen's home, or even out in public.
Goodsell points out that the physical location of the encounter and how
it is designed can affect the attitude and behavior of both the citizen
and the public official.
The third aspect of the public encounter concerns the central actors
involved, referring to the dyadic nature of the encounter and the specific
roles taken by the citizen and the public official involved in the
interaction. There is a sharp contrast between the two sides, where “the
public official has authority and is vested with legal powers; the citizen
is a private individual standing alone before the sovereign state”
(Goodsell, 1981, p. 5). Furthermore, for the citizen, the case addressed
is likely to be of personal importance. Typically, it is a single case
wherein the citizen is inexperienced in the task at hand (“an amateur”;
Goodsell, 1981). In contrast, the official is a trained professional and
expert on the task. For the public official, the interaction is just another
case among many. The official has legal powers, but is simultaneously
constrained by formal directives and rules, as well as informal norms
for behavior and even supervision (Goodsell, 1981). On the other hand,
the citizen has freedom of action in addressing the government in almost any way s/he wants. Similarly, Lenk (2002) argues that this
asymmetrical relationship between citizen and public official often is
very strong, particularly when the citizen depends on the outcome of
the encounter for her/his livelihood. This asymmetrical relationship is
highlighted as an important aspect of public service delivery and taps
into other related discussions on the nature of public services. Public
service provision does not occur in a free market where the citizen can
choose between service providers (Hirschman, 1970), and citizens have
certain constitutional rights that must be ensured through the rule of
law and the fair distribution of social resources (cf. Fountain, 2001).
The fourth aspect, the encounter's initiation, duration, and scope, acknowledges that both citizens and public officials can initiate an encounter. Goodsell (1981) applies the framework of Lefton and
Rosengren (1966) to discuss the lateral and longitudinal dimensions of
public encounters. The lateral dimension, or scope, covers the extent to
which the underlying public service influences the citizen's life. This
ranges from services only influencing limited aspects, such as renewing
a driver's license, to covering the citizen's total needs through “total
institutionalization” (e.g., being in a jail, hospital, or boarding school
(Goodsell, 1981, p. 6). The longitudinal dimension covers the time span
over which the encounter occurs. It can be brief or occur over a long
period, as a singular event or as a sequence of repetitive events. Lefton
and Rosengren (1966) argue that organizations have different—even
contrasting—interests from their clients, making the lateral and longitudinal dimensions important because they are likely to have “significantly different impacts upon the internal structure and interpersonal processes of organizations, as well as upon extraorganizational relationships” (pp. 805–806).
In summation, the public encounter refers to the purposive interaction between the citizen and public official as they communicate to
transact matters of some mutual interest. While these interactions typically concern the exchange of information or provision of public
services, they can also concern issues of control or constraint. The actors involved have scripted roles, and the relationship between them is
asymmetrical; where public officials act as professionals with vested
powers, and citizens act on behalf of themselves standing before the
sovereign state. These interactions can occur through different media
and channels and take place in different settings. We will now turn to
how the digitalization of public services changes the media and communication channels, setting, and consequently our understanding of
the public encounter itself.
4. Relating digital public services to the public encounter
In this section, we will attend to public encounters taking place in a
digitalization context. We use the term digital public services to refer to
public services provided using internet-based technologies wherein a
citizen's interaction with a public organization is mediated partly or
completely by an IT-system (Jansen & Ølnes, 2016; Lindgren & Jansson,
2013). One of the core ideas driving the digitalization of public services
is self-service (Layne & Lee, 2001; Madsen & Kræmmergaard, 2015b).
Citizens should easily be able to access government data and services
from their homes (or elsewhere) using IT artefacts. The need to
streamline internal processes in government organizations to improve
I. Lindgren, et al. Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 427–436
429
their efficiency is another driving force behind digitalization of public
services. Hence, this development is fueled by the intent to create easier
encounters for citizens and more efficient encounters for government
organizations (Axelsson, Melin, & Lindgren, 2013). Thus, this concept
refers to a heterogeneous phenomenon that varies in complexity and
can be used for different purposes. In practice and research, digital
public services are associated with multiple different terms, including egovernment service, e-service, public e-service, digital service, e-publicservice, and website channel (Lindgren & Jansson, 2013). Our application of the term ‘digital public service’ encompasses all of these terms.
In the subsections below, we present the results of our hermeneutic
literature review following the four aforementioned aspects of the
public encounter. An overview of the main characteristics of the traditional public encounter and the digital encounter is provided in
Table 1.
4.1. Understanding the nature and purpose of the digital public encounter
In the literature, we find empirical examples of how digital public
services are used to serve all three purposes presented by Goodsell
(1981); either alone, or in combination. The degree of interactivity and
technical complexity of digital public services vary from clearly delimited and rather straightforward systems to large and highly complex
systems (Jansen & Ølnes, 2016; Lindgren & Melin, 2017). To date, most
digital public services have been designed to mimic their analogue
predecessors (e.g., digital versions of paper-based forms (Heeks, 2006)).
In fact, this is the most frequent purpose of digital public services
(Eurostat, 2017). However, variation exists in the degree of human
involvement in digital public service provision. The service might appear as being completely digital from the citizen's point of view, though
most types of digital public services retain public official involvement
in the service process for preparing cases and making formal decisions
on service eligibility. For this reason, digital public services have previously been discussed in terms of being mere mediators of public services (Lindgren & Jansson, 2013), meaning that these systems provide
citizens access to public services, though do not provide the actual
service itself (Lindgren & Jansson, 2013). Using Goodsell's (1981) categories, this can be compared with the exchange of information.
However, with emergent digital technologies, digital public services
no longer merely exchange information. In other words, the purposes
for digitalization have shifted over time to include providing public services. This implies that the entire service process is supplied through the
digital channel, with examples including online applications for certificates and video-based meetings with public officials. In Scandinavia,
health care is provided as a public service and digitalization has opened
up new venues for doctor-patient interactions. Interestingly, with the
increased use of digital services in general, the perception of a physical
(face-to-face) meeting being required has somewhat changed, with digitalization enabling services that were previously unthinkable. This is
apparent in the growing number of digital medical consultations (the
Swedish National Board of Health and Welfare, 2018), where the patient can consult with medical staff through video-based conversations
and receive prescriptions for medication. Not that long ago, it was
unthinkable for medical staff to prescribe medication without a physical meeting with the patient. Through applications with secure
identification and video conferencing solutions, the entire service process of consulting medical staff can be digitalized. In Scandinavia and
beyond, the dawn of fully automated processes and systems is also
apparent, wherein the entire service is provided digitally without the
direct involvement of public officials (Wihlborg, Larsson, & Hedström,
2016). With interconnected systems and better algorithms in place,
automated digital public services have also been observed, wherein the
system makes a formal decision and immediately communicates the
decision to the user (Wihlborg et al., 2016). This development creates
opportunities for more advanced uses of public service provision
through citizen self-service.
Goodsell (1981) presents tax collection and imprisonment as examples of the last purpose of public encounters; control and constraint.
Indeed, in Scandinavia and elsewhere, citizens declare their taxes
through digital services. Another example is online meetings between
public officials and citizens that receive various forms of governmentsponsored financial support, where the citizen might be required to
report job search activities to receive continued support. Moreover,
electronic surveillance through bracelets is another example of digital
services used for the control and constraint of citizens. The Chinese
social credit system is a fourth example of digital public services being
used to both control and constraint citizens' behavior (Liang, Das,
Kostyuk, & Hussain, 2018). The type of social credit system implemented in China is enabled through a combination of various interconnected technologies, where the ability to generate and analyze
large amounts of citizen data is one of the system's key components. In
fact, new and upcoming opportunities for digitalization of public service provision associated with data mining, machine learning, sensor
technology, and service automation carry the potential to shorten the
lead time of services, increase transparency in their processes, and offer
seamless service provision across organizations (European Commission,
2016; Matheus et al., 2018). On one hand, by generating and analyzing
large amounts of citizen data, these emerging digital technologies can
create public services in which citizens' interactions with public authorities is simple, rapid, secure, and free from corruption. On the other
hand, the very same advancements in technology can be used for radically different purposes, such as limiting access to public services,
restricting and controlling citizens' behavior, and surveilling citizens'
movements both offline and online (Heeks & Bailur, 2007; Madsen
Table 1
Main characteristics of the traditional public encounter and the digital encounter.
Aspect Traditional public encounter Digital encounter
Nature and purpose of
encounter
Exchange of information. Exchange of information.
Service provision. Service provision.
Control or constraint. Control or constraint.
Communication form and
setting
Form: Letter, telephone call, office visit. Form: digital channels (e.g., websites, e-mail, IP telephony or video, chat, social
media, mobile apps, etc.).
Typical setting (place): in a citizen's home, a government
office, or an institutional building.
Typical setting (place): anywhere with internet access.
Central actors involved Public official (executive or administrative personnel) and
citizen.
Self-service for citizens downplays the role of the public official. The public official
can be completely replaced by digital technology. Providers and designers of
technology are influential actors.
Initiation, duration, and scope Can be initiated by either actor (public official or citizen). Can be initiated by either actor (public official or citizen), though typically by the
citizen. Initiation may also be automated, without the involvement of human actors.
Typically restricted to office hours. Can differ along longitudinal and lateral dimensions (regarding e.g., frequency and
Can differ along longitudinal and lateral dimensions impact on citizen's life).
(regarding e.g., frequency and impact on citizen's life).
I. Lindgren, et al. Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 427–436
430
et al., 2014). We claim that these emerging technologies are neither
good nor bad, but that public organizations' application of these technologies can significantly affect citizens' lives, either positively or negatively. We perceive this double nature of digital public services as a
problem area that our research community must study further.
4.2. Understanding the digital public encounter's communication form(s)
and setting(s)
According to Goodsell (1981), the public encounter can take place
in different settings and through different communication forms. The
most obvious effect of digital public services on the public encounter is
that internet-based technologies enable new channels for communication. Prior to the introduction of digital public services, this interaction
was primarily performed in person, by letter, or by telephone. Goodsell
(1981) treats computers and digital technology as a part of the internal
administrative processes. Since the 1960s, public sector organizations
have been keen to adopt new technology to organize their work in more
effective and efficient manners (Pieterson, Ebbers, & Madsen, 2017),
such as storing and retrieving citizen data in shared databases. Additional functionalities have been added over time, and today, internetbased technologies can facilitate communication and interaction
through various channels (e.g., digital post, e-mail, digital forms, chat,
IP telephony, mobile applications, etc.). Moreover, citizens can submit
information through online forms, resembling the exchange of physical
letters by the mailing of written forms to a public organization. Information on various public services is now accessible from most devices with an internet connection, and citizens can search for information without interacting with public officials or visiting a physical
location. Thus, digitalization of public service provision has changed
the forms of citizen and public official communication. What is interesting about digitized public services is that they also change the setting
of citizen and public official interaction.
In the recent past, public service provision was very much associated with visiting an office at a particular time to meet with a particular public official. E-government solutions in the form of digital
public services have changed the setting of the public encounter from a
public official's office, to a technical device. For example, in
Scandinavia, applications for parental benefit can be made online.
Typically, the assessment of service eligibility is made automatically by
the digital system. Only in deviant cases are public officials involved in
the service process. For most parents in Scandinavia, the public service
of applying and being granted parents' allowance is completely automated and thus resembles internet banking. This type of change is
discussed by Pollitt (2012) in terms of digitalization changing the place
of public service provision; a change for which the consequences are
not well understood. What are the consequences of the interaction
between citizens and their government being detached from the traditional place of government and moving into citizens' homes and devices? According to Pollitt (2012, p. 3), the privatization of public
services—in combination with the virtualization of citizen-government
relationships—has made the setting of citizens' interactions with the
government unclear and “...very little thinking—academic or otherwise—seems to have been addressed to this issue”.
4.3. Understanding the actors involved in the digital public encounter
The traditional public encounter is a dyadic interaction with clear
and scripted roles played by the citizen and the public official
(Goodsell, 1981). This division also holds true for most digital public
services. However, the roles appear to change in relation to digital
public services. For traditional public encounters, as described by
Goodsell (1981), the public official is a human professional that the
citizen interacts with, either directly or indirectly. However, for the
most extreme and archetypical digital public service, citizens are expected to serve themselves using the digital channel for interacting with
their government (Madsen & Kræmmergaard, 2015b).
Pollitt (2012) states that changing technologies in public service
provision changes the role and tasks for both the public official and the
public service user. The public official, instead of having tasks revolving
around face-to-face meetings, may be faced with tasks that involve
processing information at a computer, where the citizen served is distanced and anonymized. The public official can also become a support
function by teaching and helping citizens with self-service applications
(Pors, 2015). More importantly, the traditional case worker may be
fully replaced by technology. The automation of administrative processes is increasingly perceived as a way to make public administrations
more effective and efficient. We have the technology in place to automate digital public services to a larger extent than today, and the legal
frameworks currently hindering these implementations are slowly
being rewritten in Scandinavia, and elsewhere, to enable further automation (Busch, 2018). Although automated public services can yield
benefits, previous research in this area also calls for caution. Automation of public services have been found to exclude groups of citizens
from access to public service, and may ultimately undermine the legitimacy of the organization providing the service (Wihlborg et al.,
2016). The primary concern regarding public service provision automation concerns cases wherein case worker discretion (cf. Lipsky,
2010) is used to prepare a case and make formal decisions on service
eligibility. For example, for many social services, legal frameworks
must be interpreted in relation to each particular case in order to assess
service eligibility. This implies that decision-making regarding service
eligibility often involves some type of discretion on the part of public
officials (Lipsky, 2010). It remains unclear if this type of public service
can and should be digitized. Some scholars warn that automation of this
type of service might create public services that are unnecessarily exclusive for ‘atypical’ citizens (cf. Wihlborg et al., 2016); there is a risk
that these systems are designed in a way that implicitly reinforces the
norms of some actors in society and excludes others. Automation is also
thought to lead to more interesting work content for case workers, and
there are examples of how automation is used for so-called “easy processes”, leaving the cases requiring more discretion to case workers
(Busch & Henriksen, 2018). However, this strategy can also backfire.
For example, the automation of simple cases at one Swedish agency led
to higher stress levels among employees (Giritli Nygren, Axelsson, &
Melin, 2014). Due to automation of simple cases, some case workers
were laid off, while the remaining personnel were left to resolve deviant
and difficult cases (Giritli Nygren et al., 2014).
When attempting to understand digital public service provision, it is
important to observe that the public official is no longer only a human,
but can also be an artefact. This aspect of digital public services is a
potential problem area that requires further study. The public official
serving as a programmed system—as opposed to a human actor with
whom citizens can discuss and negotiate public services—calls for a
reinterpretation of the asymmetrical relationship between the citizen
and the public official. If the citizen is interacting with automated
systems, where algorithms make decisions, the asymmetrical power
relationship might become even more asymmetrical. For the citizen, it
can become difficult to know where to turn to obtain an explanation of
what a particular decision means, and it may be impossible to negotiate
the decision. Human public officials, who are part of the process, can
(at best) help translate the situation. However, strictly programmed
systems can (again, at best) reduce inequalities by treating all citizens
equally.
Furthermore, new technologies change the public service user
(Pollitt, 2012). Indeed, digital public services have the potential to increase access to public services for citizens who have previously found
it difficult to interact with the public. Citizens confined to their homes
due to disability or illness can interact with the government by themselves without representation by others when using digital services
(Pollitt, 2012). However, others may be excluded from public service
access by the very same technology (cf. the digital divide). Chiefly,
I. Lindgren, et al. Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 427–436
431
citizens can perform self-service through a digital public service if (1)
they know that the particular service exists; (2) they know how to
search for it (this requires digital and administrative skills such as
knowing the official name of the service); (3) they have a digital ID or
other means to identify themselves; and (4) the 24/7 access works for
the online interaction and no offline support is needed. Thus, many
skills are required of the citizen using these digital services (cf.
Grönlund, Hatakka, & Ask, 2007), but not all citizens can or want to
develop these skills. However, citizens equipped with such skills and
resources are given new and more flexible ways of interacting with
public officials and the government. In line with this argument, Pors
(2015, p. 617) concludes that “managing and empowering citizens is
the core task of frontline work, and how public administration is displaced into the citizen's private sphere for the purpose of creating an
efficient, digitized society”. We view these potential shifts in skill sets
required by citizens to orient themselves among public services as a
potential problem area that our research community must investigate
further.
These role changes also motivate the introduction of another group
of actors that have not been previously discussed—the actors designing
and providing the actual technology enabling digital public services.
When digital public services mediate the interaction between citizens
and public organizations, and the IT artefact plays the role of the public
official, the provision and design of these systems become particularly
important. Goodsell's (1981) framework focuses on citizens and public
organizations, and not private service providers. Today, the boundary
between what is private and public can be less distinct than implied by
Goodsell's framework; public services are now often provided in the
borderland between public and private (Janssen & Klievink, 2009). The
organization of public services varies with regard to ownership, financing, and production—meaning that public services can be owned and
financed by a public organization but produced by a private organization (Lindgren & Jansson, 2013). Similarly, the provision of technology
used to create digital public services can vary along these three dimensions. For example, public service provision can be digitized and
automated by a private company, but owned and financed by a public
organization. We have identified a potential problem area in the literature concerning actor transparency and accountability related to the
digitalization and automation of public services. We lack the necessary
analytical tools to understand and assess the roles played by those involved in the design, development, procurement, and maintenance of
these systems, among other factors. How are these actors affecting and
shaping citizens' access to public services and their interactions with
public organizations?
4.4. Understanding the initiation, duration, and scope of digital public
encounters
Upon reviewing the e-government research literature on digital
public services, Goodsell's (1981) concepts of public encounter initiation, duration and scope appear underdeveloped. To be fair, the initiation of public services is frequently mentioned in terms of digital
public services enabling citizens to initiate a service process anywhere
at any time, which implies that digitalization can make citizens' initiation of these services easier. However, it is currently evident that
digital public services blur the start and endpoints of the public encounter and challenges our traditional perception of the interaction
between citizens and public authorities. Traditionally, one of the actors
involved in a public encounter had to initiate the interaction. Now,
using automated systems with sophisticated data mining and analytics,
where will the public encounter begin and end? Potentially, we can
build a technological infrastructure that entails constant data generation that can be used for the purpose of automated public service
provision. With this type of technology, the government can provide
services in a proactive way (Scholta, Mertens, Kowalkiewicz, & Becker,
2018). A small-scale and current example can be seen in Sweden, where
automated systems for administrating road tolls have been implemented. Systems that can scan license plates have been placed in
some of the larger cities, and when a car is driven by a particular sensor,
a bill is automatically sent to the citizen registered as the car's owner.
This technology has required several government agencies to have interconnected their citizen registers. After implementation, little or no
action is required from public officials, and the citizen simply has to pay
the arriving bill. The system has been well accepted, as the majority of
citizens appreciate not having to stop their cars to pay the toll, though
concerns have been raised concerning the surveillance and registration
of citizen behavior.
The concepts of duration and scope, discussed by Goodsell (1981) as
the public encounter's longitudinal and lateral dimensions (based on
Lefton & Rosengren, 1966), are particularly worthy of further investigation. E-government studies have been criticized for ignoring the
nature of the service in question and treating these services as generic
phenomena (Hofmann et al., 2012; Madsen et al., 2014). Scholars have
attempted to differentiate between different types of digital public
service (e.g. Jansen & Ølnes, 2016; Lenk, 2002; Lindgren & Melin,
2017), but have yet to fully capture the longitudinal and lateral dimensions of the public encounter. The longitudinal dimension—or
duration of the encounter—covers the time span over which the encounter occurs. This dimension has received considerable attention in
our field in the context of digital public services reducing lead times,
being one of the main drivers behind many public service digitalization
initiatives. Digitalization and new technologies have been said to
‘shrink’ space and time, thereby making these factors less important for
our understanding of public services (Pollitt, 2012). According to Pollitt, this perception is true in some respects, though far too simple since
the “impact of technological change varies with the particular activities
under consideration, the institutional context and culture, legal rules
and financial considerations, and many other factors” (2012, pp.
29–30). However, the overall expectations of when to obtain access to
public services and how long you have to wait for a response seem to
have changed with the introduction of digital public services. Another
relevant temporal dimension of digital public services is that the dividing line between working time and leisure/private times has become
blurred in citizen-government interactions. Previously, citizens had to
take time off from work to meet a public official, while now they can
conduct their governmental business in their private time. However,
citizens must sometimes still perform these self-service tasks during
office hours, since that is when support functions are accessible.
The lateral dimension covers the extent to which an underlying
public service influences a citizen's life. Digital public services range
from having a limited influence on a citizen's life to being of great
importance to a citizen's economic situation and well-being. Notably,
we identify a potential problem area in the e-government literature
concerning this aspect of digital public services. The notion that the
degree of impact of a digital public service on a citizen's life can differ
remarkably is underdeveloped in our field; it is often mentioned, but
not explicitly treated or investigated. This aspect is partly related
to—but is not fully covered—in the discussion on digital divide issues.
Furthermore, apart from the literature on channel choice (cf. Reddick &
Turner, 2012), there remains little explicit discussion regarding the
type of public services that can and should be digitalized, and what
types of service processes citizens require or prefer human participation
and support for. As such, the manner in which the digital interface is
related to perceived importance of the service outcome is not easily
understood. For example, recent research (Madsen & Kræmmergaard,
2016) illustrates how a digital service for applying for social benefits—for which the output is of substantial importance for citizens—can
be perceived very differently by individual citizens. In the study
(Madsen & Kræmmergaard, 2016), some citizens preferred the anonymity of applying for social benefits online and not being publicly observed in their ongoing life crisis, whereas other citizens preferred
personal contact with a case worker that could help and guide them
I. Lindgren, et al. Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 427–436
432
through the public service process. There is a clear gap in the e-government literature on the lateral aspects of digital public service provision.
4.5. How does digitalization of public services affect the public encounter?
Returning to the first research question (How does digitization of
public services affect the public encounter?), the overall definition of the
public encounter presented by Goodsell (1981, p. 4) “the interaction of
citizen and official as they communicate to conduct business” remains
valid within the context of contemporary digitalization. The purposes of
the public encounter have largely remained the same since the introduction of digital public services (i.e., to exchange information,
provide public service, and/or control or constrain citizens). However,
the communication forms and settings have changed, and digitalization
has created new and sometimes innovative forms and settings for public
encounters that are likely to continue to evolve over time. The changes
in communication forms and settings have also changed the nature of
the actors involved. The discussion presented in this paper concludes
that digital public services changes the dyadic nature of the public
encounter by changing when, where, and how the interaction can
occur, which actors are involved, what each actor does, and the skills
required for all involved actors (see overview in Table 2).
5. A research agenda for studies on the digitalization of public
services and the digital public encounter
Digital technologies can improve the quality of life for many people
in our society. However, there is a risk that the aspiration to quickly
improve matters in public organizations through the use of technology
drives technological developments whose consequences are not yet
properly analyzed. As such, we must be aware that citizens' interactions
with these digital artefacts will determine if they obtain access to the
right public services, which ultimately influences their views of public
organizations. Ultimately, this affects the shaping of public organizations and the society as a whole. To sum up our discussion on identified
problem areas, the digitalization of public services;
• can be designed to make citizens' lives easier by providing services
in a more convenient manner. They can also be designed for new
types of control and constraint over citizen behavior and movement
(e.g., using technologies that can generate and analyze large bodies
of citizen data). This double nature of digital public services is not well
understood. The e-government research community again risks
being overly optimistic regarding the potential benefits of public
service digitalization by omitting the potentially negative effects for
citizen integrity and privacy.
• changes the place of citizen-government interaction. The meaning and
impact of the place of government is not explicitly dealt with in the
e-government field. A research gap exists concerning how this
change in setting affects citizens' perception of their government,
and, in turn, the perceived accountability and legitimacy of government.
• changes the casting and roles of the actors involved. A clear research
gap exists concerning what these changes entail in terms of case
worker discretion, power asymmetries, re-skilling, and actor transparency in government decision-making. We also lack an explicit
discussion on the role of the actors responsible for the design and
implementation of the technology used as well as their role in
building and shaping a digital society.
• is a multifaceted phenomenon involving various services and technologies. Notably, these services are often treated in a generic manner in
the literature. In particular, an explicit treatment and discussion of
the lateral dimensions of these services, that acknowledges digital
public services potentially having various impacts on citizens' lives,
remains lacking. Moreover, the often-mentioned lateral dimension
of public services remains under-theorized in the e-government
field.
This summary serves in part as an answer to our second research
question; What are the unaddressed research areas concerning the digitalization of the public encounter? In this final section, continue to answer
this research question by presenting a research agenda in the shape of
three research questions that we believe deserve attention from our
community; (1) Man or machine—who is the better public official?; (2)
What actors and skills are central for digital public encounters?; (3)
What are the actual consequences of digital public services for citizens'
quality of life? In a humble manner, this is also our statement on how
we can create a better world (cf. Walsham, 2012) by addressing digitalization in relation to the public encounter in a more nuanced manner
by moving beyond the techno-optimistic worldview of wanting to apply
technology and digitalize public service provision just because it is
possible.
5.1. Man or machine—Who is the better public official?
When attempting to understand the public encounter in a digital
setting, it is important to acknowledge that the public official can no
longer be understood as merely a human, as the public official can also
be (represented by) an artefact (Pieterson et al., 2017). This calls for a
reinterpretation of the relationship between the citizen and the public
official. We encourage scholars in our community to further investigate
what these changes in actors entail for the power balance between citizens and the public, and, in turn, citizens' trust in their government
(e.g., in terms of legitimacy and accountability (cf. Wihlborg et al.,
2016)). Furthermore, in relation to the digitalization of public services
and particularly the automation of these services, we can see signs
of—and aim to caution against—a new and digital era of Taylorism
(Taylor, 2004). Office work can be broken down into parts, with each
part being divided and taken care of in the most efficient manner—-
either by a person or a machine (Ebbers et al., 2008). This ultimately
leads us to the ongoing discussion on the qualities of man and machine.
People and machines have different characteristics and qualities that
can be utilized for different purposes; with new advancements in
technology, these differences have become increasingly blurred.
Therefore, digital public services must also be discussed in terms of
what tasks we desire to hand over to technology and what tasks should
be performed by humans—even when new technology can perform a
certain task in a more efficient or effective manner. For example, we
observe the need to take the issue of bureaucrats' discretion seriously
Table 2
Summary of how digitalization of public services affects the public encounter.
Aspect Changes enabled by the digitalization of public services
Nature and purpose of encounter Digitalization facilitates the automatic exchange of information and citizen self-service.
Communication form and setting Digitalization provides additional communication channels.
The ‘place’ of government changes from an official setting to almost anywhere, but especially to citizens' homes.
Central actors involved Digitalization changes the roles of the actors involved and adds new actors related to the technology that can affect the interaction.
Initiation, duration, and scope Digitalization enables 24/7 access to government services and changes citizens' expectations of government response time. Digitalization also
enables proactive services in which the initiation is performed by the technology.
I. Lindgren, et al. Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 427–436
433
(Busch & Henriksen, 2018; Lipsky, 2010), in an attempt to understand
what this discretion implies for the digitalization of public services. In
particular, we call for interdisciplinary studies of the social and societal
consequences of increased digitalization, while a primary concern for
future research should involve ethical concerns and challenges related
to increased automation of public services, governments' use of internet
of things (IoT) technology, and more efficient data mining tools. For
example, can artificial intelligence be used to better understand and
possibly mimic bureaucrats' decision-making and discretion, or is this
type of decision-making something that should be left to human actors?
5.2. What actors and skills are central for digital public encounters?
The discussion in Section 4 concludes that digital public services
changes the dyadic nature of the public encounter by changing when,
where, and how the interaction can occur, what each actor does, and
the skills required of all involved actors (cf. Grönlund et al., 2007;
Pollitt, 2012; Pors, 2015). This raises the question of who the central
actors in a public encounter are in a digitized society, and what skills
these actors require (cf. Grönlund et al., 2007). Can governments use
digital services as a means to educate and empower citizens and make
them more aware of services they are entitled to and thereby teach
citizens the skills they require for success in a digital society? Changes
in the nature of the encounter also raises the seemingly eternal question
of whether technological developments result in a de- and re-skilling of
the workforce (cf. Zuboff, 1988). With digital public services, we might
end up in a societal situation wherein fewer case workers are needed,
with IT professionals instead shaping the public service encounter (cf.
Hood & Dixon, 2015). In this scenario, who will carry the knowledge
necessary to understand the nature of public service provision—the IT
professional, or the citizen? Or will unforeseen new actors perform this
task? Will this scenario lead to a situation where the citizen must be
their own case worker (cf. Madsen & Kræmmergaard, 2016), or will the
required knowledge be embedded in the technology? In summation, we
call for further research on the potential workforce consequences and
what roles can and should be played by the actors providing these
technologies. Increased effort should be placed into investigating the
role and influence of technology providers for the public encounter.
This group of professionals has been invisible in the discussion until
now. With increased digitalization of public services, the actors designing this technology inevitably become shapers of our society
(Bovens & Zouridis, 2002). This represents a new role for IT professionals that these individuals might not even be aware of having. What
are the risks involved in allowing IT professionals to dictate how government organizations organize their processes and interact with citizens?
5.3. What are the consequences of digital public services on citizens' quality
of life?
Technological developments will continue to create new communication forms and settings for public encounters into the future, and
the dividing line between the physical and the digital world is likely to
become increasingly blurred (Pieterson et al., 2017). We particularly
wish to stress the need for critical studies investigating the ethical
concerns triggered by increased automation of public services, governments' use of IoT technology, and governments' use of data mining
and machine learning in various contexts. We also call for meta-studies
investigating the outcomes and consequences of digital public services
on citizens' quality of life. As illustrated in the previous sections, even
seemingly straightforward systems can raise ethical issues regarding
how data on citizen behavior should be generated and used. Using
Goodsell's (1981) conceptual framework, it is evident that public encounters originally meant for exchanging information can become interactions that control or constrain citizen behavior. In turn, this implies that services meant to have little impact on citizens' life (cf. the
lateral dimensions of public encounters) can even become intrusive or
controlling. We identify a great need to continuously investigate the
consequences of such technologies for the nature and purpose of public
encounters in the future. In this context, scholars in the e-government
community have an important role to play. For each new technological
development related to the public encounter, we call for e-government
researchers and practitioners to return to Walsham's (2012) question
and ask: Are we making a better world with ICTs in general and in
digitalization of public services in particular? If so, how and for whom?
6. Limitations and concluding comments
In this paper, we illustrated the importance of greater awareness
regarding changes that the digitalization of public services brings for
the interactions between citizens and the government. As stated in the
research approach section, this paper did not seek to identify and discuss all aspects of public service digitalization or completely cover the
interaction between citizens and public officials. Instead, we strived to
identify important and relevant aspects of digitalization and the public
encounter that changes our understanding and taken for granted view
on the interaction between citizens and the government.
This paper is the result of a hermeneutic literature review aimed at
expanding our understanding of how the digitalization of public services affects the public encounter. As a methodological approach, this
hermeneutic literature review focused on the interpretation of meaning
through an iterative search for comprehensive and insightful arguments
aimed at developing our understanding of the particular topic at hand
(Boell & Cecez- Kecmanovic, 2014). Concerning the quality of this
work, following the hermeneutic tradition, the presented literature review and proposed research agenda can be discussed in terms of (1) its
internal cohesion (Alvesson & Sköldberg, 2009; (2) whether the work is
supported by ‘facts’ from the interpreted material (Alvesson &
Sköldberg, 2009); and (3) whether the work is communicated in a way
that makes it possible for the reader to follow how the researcher arrived at the insights presented (Klein & Myers, 1999). Essentially, instead of discussing the quality of the work in terms of validation, the
logic of argumentation for the interpretation should be discussed
(Alvesson & Sköldberg, 2009). The arguments and research agenda
proposed in this paper are based on critical assessments of existing
knowledge from the e-government field on the digitalization of public
services using Goodsell's (1981) conceptualization of the public encounter as an analytical tool for mapping and classifying literature. The
search and analysis of literature was performed in an iterative manner
that was continued until findings could be synthesized in a coherent
and well-supported line of argumentation, thereby reaching saturation
in the process. We have continuously supported our arguments with
empirical and theoretical examples and strived for transparency in our
argumentation. Ultimately, however, the assessment of whether the
argumentation is coherent, well-supported, and logical must be made
by the reader.
A potential critique against this type of literature review and theoretical development is that is not sufficiently ‘objective’, and thus at risk
of being biased by the researcher's preunderstanding. The hermeneutic
approach rejects the notion of researcher bias in the traditional sense;
instead, it is acknowledged that the researcher's preunderstanding
shapes the analysis (Klein & Myers, 1999). Furthermore, it is recognized
that the researcher cannot assume a neutral stance (Orlikowski &
Baroudi, 1991; Walsham, 1995). Instead, the researcher's prejudice,
values, and interests always shape the manner in which s/he understands the world and the people in it. For these reasons, we have strived
to make our preunderstanding and intellectual bases as transparent as
possible. We who author this paper come from three different countries,
and have different academic backgrounds. This further enables multiple
perspectives in the analysis and reduces the risk of unwanted ‘bias’ in
the analysis.
Another potential limitation is set by the choice of the public
I. Lindgren, et al. Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 427–436
434
encounter (Goodsell, 1981) as analytical tool. As stated in the methodology section, we could have used alternative concepts as our analytical point of departure and reached different results. In addition, our
choices of practical examples and applications also affected the end
result of the present paper. As a response to possible criticisms related
to these limitations, we clarify that we have strived to find important
and relevant aspects of digitalization and the public encounter that
changes our understanding (cf. Whetten, 1989) of the interaction between citizens and government. The purpose was not to create an exhaustive and objective model for understanding the phenomenon at
hand. Instead, we believe to have illustrated that, by investigating digitalization of public services in relation to the public encounter, our
understanding of the interaction between citizens and the government
changes slightly. These changes, in turn, bring consequences for how
we should study this phenomenon in the future. It is our hope and aspiration that the research agenda presented here will attract attention
from researchers within the e-government field and fuel studies that can
critically inspect and discuss the consequences of the ongoing digitalization of public services.
Acknowledgements
An early draft of this text was presented at the 2018 Scandinavian
Workshop on e-Government; we want to acknowledge and thank our
colleagues in the Scandinavian e-Government community for valuable
feedback on our work. We also wish to thank the anonymous reviewers
for their feedback, helping us to improve our thinking and line of argument. Lindgren and Melin's participation in this work was in part
funded by a research grant from the Swedish Transportation
Administration. Madsen is employed and financed by the Research
Center for Government IT, which is a collaboration between the IT
University of Copenhagen and the Danish Ministry for Finance.
References
Alvesson, M., & Sköldberg, K. (2009). Reflexive methodology: New vistas for qualitative
research (2nd ed.). London: Sage.
Axelsson, K., Melin, U., & Lindgren, I. (2013). Public e-services for agency efficiency and
citizen benefit – Findings from a stakeholder centred analysis. Government Information
Quarterly, 30(1), 10–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2012.08.002.
Bannister, F., & Connolly, R. (2015). The great theory hunt: Does e-government really
have a problem? Government Information Quarterly, 32(1), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.giq.2014.10.003.
Boell, S. K., & Cecez- Kecmanovic, D. (2014). A hermeneutic approach for conducting
literature reviews and literature searches. Communications of the AIS, 34(12),
257–286.
Bovens, M., & Zouridis, S. (2002). From street-level to system-level bureaucracies: How
information and communication technology is transforming administrative discretion
and constitutional control. Public Administration Review, 62(2), 174–184. https://doi.
org/10.1111/0033-3352.00168.
Busch, P. A. (2018). Conceptualizing digital discretion acceptance in public service provision: A policy maker perspective. Proceedings of the 22nd Pacific Asia conference on
information systems (PACIS), Yokohama, Japan.
Busch, P. A., & Henriksen, H. Z. (2018). Digital discretion: A systematic literature review
of ICT and street-level discretion. Information Polity, 23(1), 3–28. https://doi.org/10.
3233/IP-170050.
Ebbers, W. E., Janssen, M., & Van Deursen, A. (2016). Impact of the digital divide on egovernment: Expanding from channel choice to channel usage. Government
Information Quarterly, 33(4), 685–692. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2016.08.007.
Ebbers, W. E., Pieterson, W. J., & Noordman, H. N. (2008). Electronic government:
Rethinking channel management strategies. Government Information Quarterly, 25(2),
181–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2006.11.003.
European Commission (2016). eGovernment action plan 2016–2020 accelerating the
digital transformation of government. Accessed on January 9, 2018, at https://eurlex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52016DC0179.
Eurostat (2017). Key figures on the digital economy and society. Retrieved from http://
ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/digital-economy-and-society/data/database, Accessed
date: 16 March 2018.
Fountain, J. (2001). Paradoxes of public sector customer service. Governance, 14(1),
55–73. https://doi.org/10.1111/0952-1895.00151.
Giesbrecht, T., Schwabe, G., & Schenk, B. (2017). Service encounter thinklets: How to
empower service agents to put value co-creation into practice. Information Systems
Journal, 27(2), 171–196. https://doi.org/10.1111/isj.12099.
Giritli Nygren, K., Axelsson, K., & Melin, U. (2014). Multi-channel service management in
public sector: Three interpretative frames illustrating e-government and work
practice in a Swedish state agency. Electronic Journal of e-Government, 12(1),
112–125.
Goodsell, C. T. (1981). The public encounter and its study. 1981 In C. T. Goodsell (Ed.).
The public encounter: Where state and citizen meet (pp. 3–20). Indiana University Press.
Gregor, S. (2006). The nature of theory in information systems. MIS Quarterly, 611–642.
https://doi.org/10.2307/25148742.
Grimsley, M., & Meehan, A. (2007). e-Government information systems: Evaluation-led
design for public value and client trust. European Journal of Information Systems,
16(2), 134–148. https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.ejis.3000674.
Grönlund, Å., Hatakka, M., & Ask, A. (2007). Inclusion in the e-service society–investigating administrative literacy requirements for using e-services. In M. Wimmer, J.
Scholl, & Å. Grönlund (Eds.). Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on
Electronic Government (pp. 216–227). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-540-74444-3_19.
Hasenfeld, Y., Rafferty, J. A., & Zald, M. N. (1987). The welfare state, citizenship, and
bureaucratic encounters. Annual Review of Sociology, 13(1), 387–415. https://doi.
org/10.1146/annurev.so.13.080187.002131.
Heeks, R. (2006). Implementing and managing eGovernment. An international text. London:
Sage.
Heeks, R., & Bailur, S. (2007). Analyzing e-government research: Perspectives, philosophies, theories, methods, and practice. Government Information Quarterly, 24(2),
243–265. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2006.06.005.
Helbig, N., Gil-García, J. R., & Ferro, E. (2009). Understanding the complexity of electronic government: Implications from the digital divide literature. Government
Information Quarterly, 26(1), 89–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2008.05.004.
Henman, P. (2010). Governing electronically: e-government and the reconfiguration of public
administration, policy, and power. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Hirschman, A. O. (1970). Exit, voice, and loyalty: Responses to decline in firms, organisations,
and states. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hofmann, S., Räckers, M., & Becker, J. (2012). Identifying factors for e-government acceptance - a literature review. Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on
Information Systems (ICIS 2012). Orlando, Florida.
Hood, C., & Dixon, R. (2015). A government that worked better and cost less? Evaluating three
decades of reform and change in UK Central Government. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Jansen, A., & Ølnes, S. (2016). The nature of public e-services and their quality dimensions. Government Information Quarterly, 33(4), 647–657. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
giq.2016.08.005.
Janssen, M., & Klievink, B. (2009). The role of intermediaries in multi-channel service
delivery strategies. International Journal of Electronic Government Research (IJEGR),
5(3), 36–46. https://doi.org/10.4018/jegr.2009070103.
Katz, D., Gutek, B. A., Kahn, R. L., & Barton, Z. (1975). Bureaucratic encounters: A pilot
study in the evaluation of government services. Ann Arbor: Institute for Social Research,
University of Michigan.
Klein, H. K., & Myers, M. D. (1999). A set of principles for conducting and evaluating
interpretive field studies in information systems. MIS Quarterly, 23(1), 67–93.
https://doi.org/10.2307/249410.
Layne, K., & Lee, J. (2001). Developing fully functional E-government: A four stage
model. Government Information Quarterly, 18(2), 122–136. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0740-624X(01)00066-1.
Lefton, M., & Rosengren, W. R. (1966). Organisations and clients: Lateral and longitudinal
dimensions. American Sociological Review, 802–810. https://doi.org/10.2307/
2091659.
Lenk, K. (2002). Electronic service delivery - a driver of public sector modernisation.
Information Polity, 7(2,3), 87–96. https://doi.org/10.3233/IP-2002-0009.
Liang, F., Das, V., Kostyuk, N., & Hussain, M. M. (2018). Constructing a data-driven society: China's social credit system as a state surveillance infrastructure. Policy &
Internet.. https://doi.org/10.1002/poi3.183.
Lindgren, I., & Jansson, G. (2013). Electronic services in the public sector: A conceptual
framework. Government Information Quarterly, 30(2), 163–172. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.giq.2012.10.005.
Lindgren, I., & Melin, U. (2017). Time to refuel the conceptual discussion on public eservices – revisiting how e-services are manifested in practice. In M. Janssen, (Ed.).
Proceedings of the 16th IFIP WG 8.5 International Conference on Electronic Government,
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberghttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-64677-0_8.
Lipsky, M. (2010). Street-level bureaucracy. Dilemmas of the individual in public service
(30th ann. ed.). Russell Sage Foundation.
Madsen, C., & Kræmmergaard, P. (2016). Warm experts in the age of mandatory e-government: Interaction among Danish single parents regarding online application for
public benefits. Electronic Journal of E-government, 14(1).
Madsen, C.Ø., Berger, J., & Phythian, M. (2014). The development in leading e-government articles 2001-2010: Definitions, perspectives, scope, research philosophies,
methods and recommendations: An update of Heeks and Bailur. In Janssen, (Ed.).
Proceedings of the 13th IFIP WG 8.5 International Conference on Electronic Government
(pp. 17–34). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-
44426-9_2.
Madsen, C.Ø., & Kræmmergaard, P. (2015a). Channel choice: A literature review. In
Tambouris, (Ed.). Proceedings from the 14th International Conference on Electronic
Government (pp. 3–18). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-22479-4_1.
Madsen, C.Ø., & Kræmmergaard, P. (2015b). The efficiency of freedom: Single parents'
domestication of mandatory e-government channels. Government Information
Quarterly, 32(4), 380–388. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2015.09.008.
Matheus, R., Janssen, M., & Maheshwari, D. (2018). Data science empowering the public:
Data-driven dashboards for transparent and accountable decision-making in smart
cities. Government Information Quarterly. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2018.01.006
I. Lindgren, et al. Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 427–436
435
in press.
Meijer, A., & Bekkers, V. (2015). A metatheory of e-government: Creating some order in a
fragmented research field. Government Information Quarterly, 32(3), 237–245. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2015.04.006.
Meuter, M., Ostrom, A., Roundtree, R., & Bitner, M. (2000). Self-service technologies:
Understanding customer satisfaction with technology-based service encounters.
Journal of Marketing, 64(3), 50–64. https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkg.64.3.50.18024.
Moody, G. D., Lowry, P. G., & Galletta, D. F. (2017). It's complicated: Explaining the
relationship between trust, distrust, and ambivalence in online transaction relationships using polynomial regression analysis and response surface analysis. European
Journal of Information Systems, 26(4), 379–413. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41303-
016-0027-9.
Nielsen, P. A., & Persson, J. S. (2017). Useful business cases: Value creation in IS projects.
European Journal of Information Systems, 26(1), 66–83. https://doi.org/10.1057/
s41303-016-0026-x.
Norris, D. F., & Reddick, C. G. (2013). Local e-government in the United States:
Transformation or incremental change? Public Administration Review, 73(1), 165–175.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6210.2012.02647.x.
Orlikowski, W. J., & Baroudi, J. J. (1991). Studying information technology in organizations: Research approaches and assumptions. Information systems research, 2(1),
1–28. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.2.1.1.
Pelet, J. E., & Papadopoulou, P. (2012). The effect of colors of e-commerce websites on
consumer mood, memorization and buying intention. European Journal of Information
Systems, 21(4), 438–467. https://doi.org/10.1057/ejis.2012.17.
Piccoli, G. (2016). Triggered essential reviewing: The effect of technology affordances on
service experience evaluations. European Journal of Information Systems, 25(6),
477–492. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41303-016-0019-9.
Pieterson, W., Ebbers, W. E., & Madsen, C.Ø. (2017). New channels, new possibilities: a
typology and classification of social robots and their role in multi-channel public
service delivery. In Janssen, (Ed.). Proceedings of the 16th IFIP WG 8.5 International
Conference on Electronic Government, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberghttps://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-319-64677-0_5.
Pollitt, C. (2012). New perspectives on public services: Place and technology. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Pors, A. S. (2015). Becoming digital–passages to service in the digitized bureaucracy.
Journal of Organizational Ethnography, 4(2), 177–192. https://doi.org/10.1108/JOE08-2014-0031.
Reddick, C. G., & Turner, M. (2012). Channel choice and public service delivery in
Canada: Comparing e-government to traditional service delivery. Government
Information Quarterly, 29(1), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2011.03.005.
Scholta, H., Mertens, W., Kowalkiewicz, M., & Becker, J. (2018). From one-stop shop to
no-stop shop: An e-government stage model. Government Information Quarterly.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2018.11.010 in press.
Swedish National Board of Health and Welfare (2018). Digitala vårdtjänster riktade till
patienter. Kartläggning och uppföljning. Accessed on January 9, 2018, at http://
www.socialstyrelsen.se/Lists/Artikelkatalog/Attachments/20984/2018-6-15.pdf.
Taylor, F. W. (2004). Scientific management. Routledge.
Tilson, D., Lyytinen, K., & Sørensen, C. (2010). Research commentary—Digital infrastructures: The missing IS research agenda. Information Systems Research, 21(4),
748–759. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.1100.0318.
Trist, E. (1981). The evolution of socio-technical systems. Occasional Paper, 2, 1981.
Walsham, G. (1995). Interpretive case studies in IS research: Nature and method.
European Journal of Information Systems, 4, 74–81. https://doi.org/10.1057/ejis.
1995.9.
Walsham, G. (2012). Are we making a better world with ICTs? Reflections on a future
agenda for the IS field. Journal of Information Technology, 27(2), 87–93. https://doi.
org/10.1057/jit.2012.4.
West, D. M. (2004). E-government and the transformation of service delivery and citizen
attitudes. Public Administration Review, 64(1), 15–27. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
1540-6210.2004.00343.x.
Whetten, D. A. (1989). What constitutes a theoretical contribution? Academy of
Management Review, 14(4), 490–495.
Wihlborg, E., Larsson, H., & Hedström, K. (2016). The computer says no! – A case study
on automated decision-making in public authorities. Proceedings from 49th Hawaii
International Conference on Systems Sciences (HICSS). Washington, DC: IEEE Computer
Society.
Zuboff, S. (1988). In the age of the smart machine. The future of work and power. Oxford:
Heinermann Professional Publishing.
Ida Lindgren is an assistant professor in Information Systems, Linköping University,
Sweden. She conducts research on information systems development in the public-sector
context. Her work is published in e.g. Government Information Quarterly, Transforming
Government – People, Process, Policy, and in proceedings from several IS conferences and
the IFIP Electronic Government conference.
Christian Østergaard Madsen is an assistant professor at the Research Center for
Government IT at the IT University of Copenhagen. His research concerns public digitalisation, service design, and multichannel management. He has published in
Government Information Quarterly, International Journal of Public Administration in the
Digital Age, the Electronic Journal of e-Government and the IFIP Electronic Government
conference.
Sara Hofmann is an associate professor in Information Systems at the University of
Agder, Norway. Her research focuses on digitisation in the public sector, which she has
published in several conference and journal publications. She has participated in national
and international research projects on e-government, service science and IT adoption.
Ulf Melin is a full professor in Information Systems, Linköping University, Sweden. His
research is focused on public sector digitalization. Ulf is active in several IS conferences
and has published in e.g. Government Information Quarterly, Transforming Government
– People, Process and Policy, International Journal of Electronic Governance,
International Journal of Public Information Systems.
I. Lindgren, et al. Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 427–436
436