Ng KHH, et al. BMJ Open Quality 2025;14:e003150. doi:10.1136/bmjoq-2024-003150 1
Open access
Optimising pharmacy processes in
medication delivery service through
digitalisation and automation
Kian Hong Hong Ng , Wen Jun Tiew, Yook Ting, Amanda Woo,
Wei Xiong, Nathaniel Lim, Tou Teik, George Lim, Arleen Susan Baskaran
To cite: Ng KHH, Tiew WJ,
Woo YTing,A, et al. Optimising
pharmacy processes in
medication delivery service
through digitalisation and
automation. BMJ Open Quality
2025;14:e003150. doi:10.1136/
bmjoq-2024-003150
Received 2 October 2024
Accepted 27 February 2025
Pharmacy, Changi General
Hospital, Singapore
Correspondence to
Kian Hong Hong Ng;
ngkianhong1991@gmail.com
Quality improvement report
© Author(s) (or their
employer(s)) 2025. Re-use
permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights
and permissions. Published by
BMJ Group.
ABSTRACT
The rapid expansion of medication delivery service (MDS)
during COVID-19 created many new roles in the pharmacy
which are manpower intensive and not sustainable as
pharmacy resumes counter collection services. To keep
MDS operations sustainable, we identified the need to
streamline and automate processes which are manual
and repetitive. We seek to determine if the Plan, Do, Study,
Act (PDSA) cycles would effectively reduce the man-hours
required for the MDS over two phases in 1 year. Phase 1
involved digitalisation of order taking and automation of
the data entry process. Phase 2 involved automating the
order generation and accounting process to replicate the
patient information matching task which was performed
manually during bagging and dispatch of delivery
orders. The baseline period for this study was from
December 2020 to January 2021. The results following
implementation of PDSA cycles in the respective phases
were collected between January 2021 to June 2021 and
July 2021 to December 2021. The average time taken for
data entry per delivery order reduced from a range of 0.5
to 2.15min to 0.08 to 0.1min depending on the ordering
method (p<0.05). The average time taken for bagging
and dispatch per delivery order shortened from 2.7 min to
0.28 min (p<0.05). The improvements were sustained and
cumulatively contributed to 11.8-man-hour savings. The
impact of the interventions was discussed. As MDS gains
prominence as an important alternative for medication
collection due to its rapid expansion due to COVID-19,
it is crucial for the pharmacy to expand its capacity and
information technology capabilities to cope with higher
workload from both MDS and walk-in patients.
PROBLEM
The rapid expansion of medication delivery
service (MDS) during COVID-19 created
new work processes in the pharmacy which
are manpower intensive and not sustainable
as pharmacy resumed counter collection
services. Although MDS was meant to decant
patients home after their consultation, a
greater number of orders taken meant more
rostered man-hours were required for the
downstream processing.
Both MDS and counter collection tap on
the existing pharmacy processes for keying,
packing and dispensing which have been
optimised through the implementation of
Outpatient Pharmacy Automated System
previously.1
 MDS requires an additional 18
man-hours on the roster for the new MDS
processes. Due to the ongoing pandemic, it
was inevitable for staff attrition due to COVID
infection to also affect the overall pharmacy
operations.2
Previous efforts were targeted at promoting
MDS through adoption of digital order-taking
platforms.3–5 Incorporation of delivery orders
from digital platforms offered insights on the
potential for digitising all incoming orders
to streamline information transfer for downstream processing. There is a growing body of
evidence which demonstrates the benefits of
process automation in terms of productivity,
cost savings and improved accuracy.6–9 Noting
that the additional work processes were
WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ON THIS TOPIC
⇒ Digitalisation and automation in pharmacy services,
such as robotic dispensing systems and electronic
order integration, improve efficiency, reduce errors,
and free staff for patient care, particularly during crises like COVID-19.
WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS
⇒ This study uniquely demonstrates low-cost automation (e.g., Excel macros, SikuliX) as a feasible
alternative to expensive systems, achieving 11.8
man-hour savings/day with minimal capital expenditure. The integration of barcode scanning and
next-day delivery models further advances realworld solutions for accuracy and scalability, aligning with calls for adaptable, crisis-ready pharmacy
workflows.
HOW THIS STUDY MIGHT AFFECT RESEARCH,
PRACTICE OR POLICY
⇒ This study underscores the need for healthcare
systems to prioritize IT infrastructure and staff training in digitalization, informing policies that support
scalable, crisis-resilient pharmacy services while
maintaining patient access during emergencies like
pandemics.
BMJ Open Quality: first published as 10.1136/bmjoq-2024-003150 on 24 March 2025. Downloaded from https://bmjopenquality.bmj.com on 7 November 2025 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
2 Ng KHH, et al. BMJ Open Quality 2025;14:e003150. doi:10.1136/bmjoq-2024-003150
Open access
manual in nature, the project team can replicate similar
successes by identifying suitable candidates for automation to optimise the MDS operations while ensuring accuracy and freeing up valuable human resources for patient
care activities.
This project aimed to reduce the man-hours required
for these additional MDS processes by 50% within a 1-year
intervention time period. As there were no previous data
for these additional MDS processes, the aim is to compare
the average time taken for the identified processes before
and after the interventions.
BACKGROUND
Changi General Hospital (CGH) is a public hospital
serving the southern and eastern parts of the island. It is
one of the largest hospitals in Singapore, with a capacity
of over 1000 beds.10 The hospital began to rapidly expand
pharmacy processes for MDS during the first quarter of
2020 to cope with the disruptions from the COVID-19
pandemic.11 12 Demand for medication delivery quickly
picked up when the local government raised the Disease
Outbreak Response System Condition to orange in
February 2020 and subsequently implemented the
‘circuit breaker’ in April 2020 to control COVID-19
spread. Members of the public were advised to minimise
movements and interactions in public and private places
and to remain at home unless for essential purposes.13 14
On a national level, delivery service fees were waived
by public healthcare institutions for patients on prescription medicines to allow patients to avoid travelling to
healthcare facilities.11 Close to 395000 medication deliveries were made from 1 February to 19 August 2020. An
average of 3200 deliveries were made in August 2020, a
10-fold increase from before the pandemic started.12 15
The outpatient pharmacy processed an average of
5200 deliveries per month between April to June 2020,
an eight-fold increase relative to the previous quarter
(figure 1). This delivery load sustained and even escalated to an average of 7800 deliveries between October
2020 to March 2021. The numbers only began stabilising from April 2021 onwards, averaging 5500 deliveries
monthly as pharmacy ceased offering urgent same-day
or next-day delivery options and introduced a daily cap
to the number of deliveries. The intention was to transit
patients back to collecting medications in pharmacy as
the COVID situation continued to improve during phase
3 reopening.16 17 During this transition, resources were
redirected to support pharmacy operations for physical
collection. MDS operations were not sustainable if the
numbers remained high.
The outpatient pharmacy serves patients from all
SOCs within the Medical Centre. Patients who had
same-day consultations or walk-in patients could opt
for MDS by submitting their prescriptions or medication balance memo for order taking at the MDS counter
outside the pharmacy. Otherwise, patients could call in
to the pharmacy to place orders. Orders would then
be recorded onto paper order slips. For digital order
submission, they could log in to the digital health app,
Health Hub or Health Buddy or submit via FormSG,
which was a secure digital form builder platform that
enabled the pharmacy to customise a delivery form for
data collection.3 4
Figure 1 Monthly delivery load trend versus pharmacy waiting time trend in 2020 and 2021.
BMJ Open Quality: first published as 10.1136/bmjoq-2024-003150 on 24 March 2025. Downloaded from https://bmjopenquality.bmj.com on 7 November 2025 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
Ng KHH, et al. BMJ Open Quality 2025;14:e003150. doi:10.1136/bmjoq-2024-003150 3
Open access
The fish bone diagram (figure 2) summarises the issues
encountered by the outpatient pharmacy in sustaining
MDS operations.
We defined the manpower input based on the average
time taken per delivery for each of the identified processes
in MDS. A process mapping was done to broadly define
the main processes which were involved in a delivery order
(figure 3). Within each main process, tasks which bear
characteristics that promote automation were identified.
These identified tasks, although clearly defined in job
scope, are manual and highly repetitive. There was potential for existing information technology (IT) systems to
provide patient details if delivery details were recorded
electronically instead. Through a retrospective analysis of
our delivery transaction record, we established that most
delivery addresses are consistent with the database in the
outpatient appointment system (OAS) which is linked
to our prescribing and pharmacy system. Therefore, our
interventions could potentially tap into the OAS to replicate and reduce work done by these existing roles.
Our project aim was to substantially reduce the overall
man-hours required for these MDS processes through
digitising delivery details and automating the work done
in these roles. We also aim to simplify the workflow within
each process and eliminate manual roles through our
interventions.
MEASUREMENT
Between December 2020 and January 2021, a time
motion study was done to collect baseline data for the
MDS processes. Pharmacy staff who were rostered for
the respective MDS duties were instructed to record the
number of delivery orders processed during their rostered
time slots. The average time taken per order would then
be calculated based on the average number of orders
completed within the rostered duration. The exercise was
conducted over a 1-month period to include all eligible
pharmacy staff who could be involved. Self-reporting was
chosen over the observation method for data recording
Figure 2 Fish bone Diagram identifying potential root causes for unsustainable medication delivery service (MDS) operations.
Figure 3 Medication delivery service (MDS) process mapping in a flow Chart.
BMJ Open Quality: first published as 10.1136/bmjoq-2024-003150 on 24 March 2025. Downloaded from https://bmjopenquality.bmj.com on 7 November 2025 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
4 Ng KHH, et al. BMJ Open Quality 2025;14:e003150. doi:10.1136/bmjoq-2024-003150
Open access
feasibility purposes, and a longer period was considered
to allow for a fairer representation of the overall productivity under the current processes. This also helped to
minimise the Hawthorne effect.18
The productivity post-intervention was measured based
on the time taken to process each delivery order either
by the rostered staff using the digitalisation tool or the
automation tools itself. Zero minutes would be recorded
if the role has been eliminated due to the intervention.
DESIGN
The team was led by the pharmacist in charge of the
Medication Delivery Service along with five other
pharmacists who were working in the Medical Centre
Outpatient Pharmacy. A software engineer from
Health Services Research (HSR) provided support
for this project as subject matter expert for automation. Our project sponsor was our outpatient pharmacy manager who lent us her support to engage in
discussions with external stakeholders to implement
legacy changes and enlist support from our Allied
Health Director to expedite our IT requests with the
Integrated Health Information Systems (IHIS). The
implementation of our automation relied on our
highly adaptable outpatient pharmacy team.
We reviewed the baseline data that was collected
and rationalise that the implementation timeline for
this Quality Improvement (QI) project would be in
two phases, over a period of 1 year. Rapid Plan, Do,
Study, Act (PDSA) testing cycles were adopted in our
approach.19 The intent was to fully digitise the delivery
order details in the upstream processes in the first
phase, then observe the impact on the downstream
processes before formulating new interventions. We
engaged the pharmacy staff involved in these roles on
the ground to ensure their active participation and
ownership for successful implementation.
STRATEGY
Intervention phase 1 (January 2021 to June 2021)
Patient Registration system
Plan, Do, Study, Act (PDSA) cycle 1
An electronic form was created using macros in Excel
to eliminate order slips recording and the additional
step of transcribing electronically.20 The recorded
information was stored electronically on order
submission. Delivery details could be auto-populated
from database records the next time a patient identification number (ID) was entered.
Plan, Do, Study, Act (PDSA) cycle 2
Functional enhancements were added to improve
usability and robustness. An auto-backup feature
prevents data loss. An overwrite database function
allowed users to update patient particulars if changes
were noted. Confirmation prompts were added to
remind users to verify information. Shortcut keys such
as ‘details as per OAS’, ‘fridge item’ tick box and hot
keys for ‘clear form’ were added on the electronic
form to reduce repetitive data entry.
SikuliX
Plan, Do, Study, Act (PDSA) cycle 1
For same-day clinic patients, the patient details on
the physical prescription itself were also available on
OAS. In collaboration with HSR, a visual automation
tool called SikuliX was trialled to automate the data
entry process. This programme would identify and
interact with graphical user interface (GUI) components on the OAS to extract and input delivery details
onto Excel records based on the list of patient IDs
collated from the submitted physical prescriptions.21
Plan, Do, Study, Act (PDSA) cycle 2
Ground user feedbacks that the SikuliX programme
would halt unexpectedly during auto-population of
delivery details. Script modifications to account for
specific conditions or inter-variability in interface
across computers were executed with guidance from
HSR’s developer to improve reliability and robustness
of the process, and an auto-save function was added to
prevent data loss during programme halt.
FormSG
Plan, Do, Study, Act (PDSA) cycle 1
The initial extraction process for FormSG orders was
cumbersome as orders were extracted via email for
printing to facilitate order screening and manual data
entry subsequently. To eliminate data entry, a JavaScript
application by FormSG was used to export delivery details
into Excel for processing.
Plan, Do, Study, Act (PDSA) cycle 2
Email extraction and printing of FormSG orders were still
necessary for downstream MDS processes. A new script
application was created in collaboration with the IHIS
developer to generate print-ready FormSG orders files
and export delivery details into Excel, processing became
instantaneous.
Intervention phase 2 (July 2021 to December 2021)
Up to June 2021, the interventions implemented during
phase 1 were sustained and could maintain accuracy
of delivery details. Generation of delivery labels from
patients details became smoother as delivery details were
fully digitised and delivery orders could be consolidated
easily. However, the downstream process of bagging and
dispatch was still hindered by the reliance on physical
documents for patient information matching, and the
generation of pharmacy bills was a potential rate-limiting
step.
Under the improved workflow, prescriptions processed
through SikuliX and FormSG slips were still retained
for patient information matching by the ‘sealer’ before
affixing the delivery label and sealing the parcel
(figure 4). The inclusion of pharmacy bills in the delivery
BMJ Open Quality: first published as 10.1136/bmjoq-2024-003150 on 24 March 2025. Downloaded from https://bmjopenquality.bmj.com on 7 November 2025 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
Ng KHH, et al. BMJ Open Quality 2025;14:e003150. doi:10.1136/bmjoq-2024-003150 5
Open access
parcel was still required to provide patients with price
information of their delivery order(s). We identified
the pharmacy billing step to be a separate process from
the MDS operations that could be performed after the
delivery order was keyed into the system for packing and
dispensing. Hence, bagging and dispatch to assemble the
delivery parcel could only start once the delivery labels
are generated, delivery orders are dispensed, and pharmacy bills are printed.
1) Eliminating repetitive patient information matching
Plan, Do, Study, Act (PDSA) cycle 1: using Macros to eliminate
patient information matching
Tapping on the successful use of macros in Excel in the
electronic order form from phase 1, the team explored
developing new macro functions by programming on
Visual Basic Editor to replicate and consolidate the
patient information matching function involved in
the current workflow.22
The new macros function for the delivery transaction record in Excel enabled systematic generation
of dispensing order sheets with their corresponding
delivery labels. This enabled pharmacy dispensers to
take over the role of ‘bagger’ to bag up dispensed
medications and ‘sealer’ to affix delivery labels before
sealing off the parcels. The team sought feedback
from the dispensing staff to keep the workload per
order sheet manageable. The consensus was to keep
to a maximum of eight patients per dispensing order
sheet with their corresponding delivery labels.
Separately, another new macro function for the work
order Excel enabled the ‘dispatcher’ to scan barcodes on
delivery labels to highlight the corresponding delivery
order numbers on Excel when accounting for parcels
prior to dispatch.
Plan, Do, Study, Act (PDSA) cycle 2: eliminating pharmacy bills in
parcels
The delivery parcel could not be sealed off by the pharmacy dispenser as it was still pending inclusion of the pharmacy bill. To address this issue, the team, together with
our project sponsor, engaged the stakeholders from the
Business Office and Finance Department for consensus
to exclude pharmacy bills from delivery parcels. Patients
may access the pharmacy bills for their delivery orders
and make payments electronically via the digital health
app—Health Hub or Health Buddy. The pharmacy would
continue to print bills and mail them out separately
Figure 4 Quality improvement for phase 2.
BMJ Open Quality: first published as 10.1136/bmjoq-2024-003150 on 24 March 2025. Downloaded from https://bmjopenquality.bmj.com on 7 November 2025 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
6 Ng KHH, et al. BMJ Open Quality 2025;14:e003150. doi:10.1136/bmjoq-2024-003150
Open access
by post until the stakeholders were able to review and
approve for the complete removal of sending out pharmacy bills to patients. Under the new workflow (figure 4),
the pharmacy dispenser could seal off the delivery parcel
after dispensing the medications and pasting the corresponding delivery labels.
2) Switching to the next day delivery model
Despite the automations from the earlier PDSA cycles,
ad hoc new delivery requests or urgent changes to
delivery timing or date were still disruptive to operations. Also, there was recurring feedback from patients
regarding late deliveries and requests for earlier
delivery timeslots. The current same-day dispatchdelivery arrangement involved CGH as the dispatch
point. Couriers would come in at least 1 hour before
each delivery time slot (2–6 PM, 6–10 PM). This model
was originally preferred as pharmacy offered same day
or next day urgent delivery to clinic patients during
the early days of COVID-19. The project team reviewed
the suitability of the current model and engaged the
Agency of Logistics and Procurement Services which
contracted the current vendor for courier services to
explore alternatives within the scope of work in the
current contract.
A new dispatch for next day delivery model was
introduced in January 2022 which relocated the
dispatch point to the courier’s warehouse. Ambient
and cold chain storage of the medication parcels
were maintained in accordance with Singapore Standard 644 (SS 644): guidelines for supply and delivery
of medication at the vendor’s warehouse.23 Delivery
orders for all timeslots were accounted via bar code
scanning by the ‘dispatcher’ before dispatching to
the collection driver once daily in the late afternoon.
Parcels were transported back to the warehouse for
sorting and route planning before delivery the next
working day. Couriers would collect medication
parcels from the warehouse and return failed deliveries for rescheduling. Patients were advised to liaise
directly with the courier for rescheduling of failed
deliveries or upcoming deliveries if the delivery date
was within three working days’ time to reduce unnecessary follow-up processing on the pharmacy’s end.
Furthermore, a new delivery time slot (10 AM–2 PM)
could be introduced to maximise the utility of the
courier service and improve convenience for patients.
RESULTS
An independent t-test was used to determine the statistical significance of the results before and after interventions for both QI phases.
The improvement made by the respective interventions
from phases 1 and 2 was represented in the control chart
(figure 5) over a 1-year period.
At the end of the PDSA cycles during phase 1, the
average time taken per order improved from between
0.90 and 2.15min to between 0.08 and 0.1min depending
on the ordering method (table 1)(p<0.05). The variance
(represented by error bar in figure 5) for the time taken
for data entry from order slip using the Pharmacy Registration System (PRS) and prescription via SikuliX respectively reduced by 10%.
Figure 5 Progress of time taken for each medication delivery service (MDS) process after interventions.
BMJ Open Quality: first published as 10.1136/bmjoq-2024-003150 on 24 March 2025. Downloaded from https://bmjopenquality.bmj.com on 7 November 2025 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
Ng KHH, et al. BMJ Open Quality 2025;14:e003150. doi:10.1136/bmjoq-2024-003150 7
Open access
For the second phase of QI, the overall average time
taken per order for bagging and dispatch improved from
2.7min per delivery order to 0.28min per order (p<0.05).
There were corresponding 15% and 10% reduction in
variances for bagging of medication and matching of label
with the help of Excel in macros in transaction records to
consolidate the role of ‘bagger’ and ‘sealer’.
The implementation of PRS, SikuliX and FormSG
collator enabled the data entry and order collation to be
more efficient and accurate. The PRS helped to digitise
delivery details and eliminated additional manual transcribing from order slips. The initiation of PRS enabled
pharmacy staff to perform data entry of new order
requests in real time, and the creation of electronic database from PRS significantly sped up retrieval of delivery
order details for patients.
The quality improvement effort from phase 2 was
contingent on the adoption of the digital tools from phase
1 which enabled the full digitisation of delivery details
recording. The consolidation of roles only incurred an
additional 0.18-min workload per order for the pharmacy dispenser. Adopting barcode scanning of delivery
labels to account for parcels on the work order Excel
greatly improved accuracy, eliminated time variance and
reduced time taken per order by 80%. It also promoted
more autonomy for the ‘dispatcher’ in helping to track
and reconcile missing parcels.
The switch to the next-day delivery model has reduced
phone calls regarding amendment of delivery timings,
rescheduling of failed deliveries and checking of delivery
status. Patients would receive system-generated SMS
reminders regarding their delivery on the morning of
delivery, and the customer service number of the courier
would be provided as well.
Overall, feedback from our pharmacy staff was positive
despite many rounds of workflow changes since January
2021. Pharmacy technicians and assistants were receptive
towards adopting the digital tools and even provided user
feedback to further improve the user experience. Sufficient user trainings were conducted to ensure full participation from the pharmacy team. The interventions from
our QI project were sustained and contributed to cumulative 11.8-man-hour savings on average per day, more than
50% of our initial project aim. Digitisation of delivery
order details enabled accurate real-time tabulation and
effective control of daily delivery load for manpower optimisation of MDS operations. Pharmacy could thus plan
ahead for extended weekends due to public holidays
whereby sharp spikes in delivery requests were usually
expected or even unexpected prolonged high staff
absences.
In a separate manpower project in January 2022, the
streamlined MDS processes allowed for the outpatient
pharmacy roster to be reorganise into four smaller teams
Table 1 Average time taken for the respective medication delivery service (MDS) process with respect to the PDSA cycle
Phase 1 (January 2021 to June 2021)
Average time taken per order (minutes) Average number of orders to data
entry per day
Average time saved per day
(minutes) Previous workflow PDSA cycle
Data entry from order slip Data entry via PRS 63 56.7
1.8±0.36 0.90±0.09
Data entry from prescription Data entry via SikuliX 52 33.8
0.90±0.09 0.25
Data entry from FormSG slips Process via FormSG collator 75 161.25
2.15 0
Total man-hour savings per day ≈ 4.2hours
Phase 2 (July 2021 to December 2021)
Previous workflow PDSA cycle Average number of orders per day Average time saved per day
(minutes)
Bagging medications Bagging medications after dispensing 190 171
1±0.25 0.10±0.01
Match the delivery label to the
medication
Affix the delivery label by the dispenser 79.8
0.5±0.10 0.08±0.008
Match the invoice to the package Post out the invoice separately 133
0.7±0.14 0
Manual account against order paper Barcode scan label to account 76
0.5±0.1 0.1
Total man-hour savings per day ≈ 7.6hours
PDSA, Plan, Do, Study, Act.
BMJ Open Quality: first published as 10.1136/bmjoq-2024-003150 on 24 March 2025. Downloaded from https://bmjopenquality.bmj.com on 7 November 2025 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
8 Ng KHH, et al. BMJ Open Quality 2025;14:e003150. doi:10.1136/bmjoq-2024-003150
Open access
to cater to MDS operations on a weekly rotation. The
team-based approach offered pharmacy staff respite from
direct patient fronting duties, which proved effective in
improving staff well-being and morale. A staff perception
survey was conducted among 26 staff 1 year postimplementation. The majority of employees reported positive outcomes across all six measured aspects (figure 6).
More than 90% of the staff also felt that they experienced
improved satisfaction at work after starting the teambased roster.
The balancing measures tracked in this project were the
average pharmacy waiting time for medication collection by
month (figure 1). The manpower savings from this project
were mainly targeting pharmacy technicians and assistants
who were involved in either upstream or downstream of
MDS operations. More than half are not involved in counter
dispensing. Our team noted high turnover of pharmacist,
pharmacy technician and assistants in similar proportions
which could have affected the waiting time as pharmacies face
declining manpower resources. The overall high turnover
was found to be related to growing fatigue due to COVID-19’s
impact at the workplace.24 25 There was no significant correlation found between the implementation of PDSA cycles from
both phases on pharmacy waiting time.
LESSONS AND LIMITATIONS
Lessons Learnt
Our project has demonstrated the positive impacts of process
automation in productivity and accuracy. The project could
not have happened without inter-departmental collaboration from HSR and IHIS during phase 1 to trial out RPA via
SikuliX and to develop the FormSG order extraction process
respectively.
Although this project was driven by the need to reduce
manpower input for MDS, the experience gained from using
automation tools has led the team to spread their applications
in other areas within pharmacy. A SikuliX script was written to
automate data extraction from the pharmacy system for stock
tallying during audits. This eliminated manually searching
and recording of stock levels for each item, leading to significant time savings. Electronic forms were created using
macros in Excel for the purpose of recording patient’s ID
when top-up prescriptions were handed over from different
clinics using a time stamp. This sped up information retrieval
when accounting for the possession of prescriptions before
supplying top-up medications to patient. Therefore, these
digital tools are versatile and can be applied in a variety of
ways to improve productivity and reduce manpower hours
spent on repetitive manual work in pharmacy.26
Gathering feedback from ground staff and regular updates
on the workflow changes during roll calls was necessary to
keep them engaged since the start of the project. Data-driven
decision-making helped convince all parties to adopt the new
digital tools quickly.
Limitations
Due to the operational nature of data collection for the MDS
processes before and after the PDSA cycles, it is possible for
errors arising from transcription mistakes, variability in staff
efficiency and external factors involving language barriers
or complex prescription orders to contribute to longer
time taken for each process. Other external factors such as
unanticipated system downtimes resulting in delivery data
loss remained unaddressed as the back-up data needs to
be reconciled manually once a downtime is identified. This
underscores the need for a more robust error-handling
process and improved user feedback mechanism to enable
timely modifications to the Excel macros script, enhancing its
reliability and minimise errors.
High cost and long lead time for system enhancements
remained a major hurdle in improving productivity for new
pharmacy services which emerged due to COVID-19.26 It is
important to note that no capital expenditure (Capex) was
incurred to purchase new systems for this QI project. The
development of these digital tools incurred man-hours from
our project team, HSR and IHIS.
We believe that streamlining MDS digital platforms for
patients is the long-term solution to keep MDS operations
lean and sustainable. Based on the overall ease of collating
patient and delivery details, Health Buddy and Health Hub
are the preferred platforms because the enhanced Medicine
Order Service feature allows patient to retrieve prescription
Figure 6 Survey result on staff perception towards team-based roster for medication delivery service (MDS) operations.
BMJ Open Quality: first published as 10.1136/bmjoq-2024-003150 on 24 March 2025. Downloaded from https://bmjopenquality.bmj.com on 7 November 2025 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
Ng KHH, et al. BMJ Open Quality 2025;14:e003150. doi:10.1136/bmjoq-2024-003150 9
Open access
records in terms of medication balance from our pharmacy
systems when placing delivery orders. 27 Patient education
to address potential barriers towards the adoption of Health
Buddy and Health Hub is the next potential area of focus for
the team.
CONCLUSION
The adoption of digital and automation tools to record
delivery orders electronically was critical in enabling downstream interventions to improve the overall productivity of
MDS. The key motivation behind the project was to keep
MDS operation sustainable by simplifying work processes and
eliminating manual roles performing repetitive tasks.
The interventions proposed required technical expertise
from the HSR and IHIS for development and participation
from an adaptable pharmacy workforce for successful implementation. This project demonstrated how automation
could be implemented in a zero-cost manner using existing
hospital resources.
The digital transformation of MDS provides insights on
adjusting manpower structure to expand the scalability of
MDS to cope with higher patient load in future. As MDS
gains prominence as an important alternative for medication
collection due to its rapid expansion due to COVID-19, it is
crucial for pharmacy to expand its capacity and IT capabilities to cope with higher workload from both MDS and walk-in
patients. The team is looking into system enhancements to
further integrate MDS as part of the patient journey in the
SOCs.
Contributors WJ and NKH both contributed to the design and writing of this
quality improvement report. WJ and NKH both contributed to data collection and
interpretation of the results of this study. NKH was the main author of the submitted
report. Both WJ and NKH were involved in editing the report for clarity and details.
NKH submitted the report and takes responsibility for the overall content. BAS was
the guarantor for this project.
Funding The authors have not declared a specific grant for this research from any
funding agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.
Competing interests None declared.
Patient and public involvement Patients and/or the public were not involved in
the design, conduct, reporting or dissemination plans of this research.
Patient consent for publication Not applicable.
Ethics approval Not applicable.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer-reviewed.
Data availability statement Data are available in a public, open access repository.
Data are available upon reasonable request.
Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially,
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is
properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use
is non-commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
ORCID iD
Kian Hong Hong Ng http://orcid.org/0009-0008-3102-2954
REFERENCES
1 Cgh.com.sg. 2019. Available: https://www.cgh.com.sg/news/patientcare/better-quicker-care-at-cghs-new-centre
2 Begum S, Chua N. S’pore healthcare workers feel the strain of
manpower crunch amid rise in covid-19 cases. The Straits Times;
2021. Available: https://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/health/
spore-healthcare-workers-feel-the-strain-of-manpower-crunch-amidrise-in-covid-19
3 Patients to benefit from improved medication access and better
medication literacy. Singhealthacademy.edu.sg; 2019. Available:
https://www.singhealthacademy.edu.sg/news/patient-care/
patients-to-benefit-from-improved-medication-access-and-bettermedication-literacy
4 FAQs for health buddy - singhealth. Singhealth.com.sg; 2019.
Available: https://www.singhealth.com.sg/patient-care/patientvisitor-info/pages/health-buddy-faqs.aspx
5 FormSG: from idea to hit platform in a year. Gov.sg; 2024. Available:
https://knowledge.csc.gov.sg/ethos-issue-21/formsg-from-idea-tohit-platform-in-a-year/
6 Spinks J, Jackson J, Kirkpatrick CM, et al. Disruptive innovation in
community pharmacy - Impact of automation on the pharmacist
workforce. Res Social Adm Pharm 2017;13:394–7.
7 Schneider PJ, Pedersen CA, Scheckelhoff DJ. ASHP national
survey of pharmacy practice in hospital settings: Dispensing and
administration-2017. Am J Health Syst Pharm 2018;75:1203–26.
8 Weir NM, Newham R, Bennie M. A literature review of human factors
and ergonomics within the pharmacy dispensing process. Res Social
Adm Pharm 2020;16:637–45.
9 Zayas-Cabán T, Haque SN, Kemper N. Identifying Opportunities for
Workflow Automation in Health Care: Lessons Learned from Other
Industries. Appl Clin Inform 2021;12:686–97.
10 Hospital overview. Com.sg; 2024. Available: https://www.cgh.com.sg/
about-us
11 Tiffany Fumiko Tay. Coronavirus: public healthcare institutions waive
medicine delivery fees for patients. The Straits Times; 2020. Available:
https://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/coronavirus-public-healthcareinstitutions-waive-medicine-delivery-fees-for-patients
12 News highlights. Ministry of Health; 2024. Available: https://www.
moh.gov.sg/news-highlights/details/medication-delivery
13 Risk assessment raised to dorscon orange. Ministry of Health;
2024. Available: https://www.gov.sg/article/additional-measuresintroduced-with-dorscon-orange
14 Circuit breaker to minimise further spread of COVID-19. Ministry of
Health; 2024. Available: https://www.moh.gov.sg/news-highlights/
details/circuit-breaker-to-minimise-further-spread-of-covid-19
15 MOH. News highlights. n.d. Available: https://www.moh.gov.sg/newshighlights/details/medication-delivery-services-available-to-patients
16 MOH. News highlights. n.d. Available: https://www.moh.gov.sg/
news-highlights/details/end-of-circuit-breaker-phased-approach-toresuming-activities-safely
17 Ministry of Health. Moving into phase three of re-opening. 2024.
Available: https://www.moh.gov.sg/newsroom/moving-into-phasethree-of-re-opening
18 McCambridge J, Witton J, Elbourne DR. Systematic review of the
Hawthorne effect: new concepts are needed to study research
participation effects. J Clin Epidemiol 2014;67:267–77.
19 Taylor MJ, McNicholas C, Nicolay C, et al. Systematic review of the
application of the plan–do–study–act method to improve quality in
healthcare. BMJ Qual Saf 2014;23:290–8.
20 How to use excel macros to save time and automate your work.
Computerworld. n.d. Available: https://www.computerworld.com/
article/1614590/how-to-use-excel-macros-save-time-automate-work.
html
21 Github.io. 2024. Available: https://sikulix.github.io/docs/
22 Differences between office scripts and VBA macros - office scripts.
2023. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/office/dev/scripts/
resources/vba-differences
23 Singapore Manufacturing Federation. News. 2024. Available: https://
www.smfederation.org.sg/news/new-standards-launch-guidelinessupply-and-delivery-medicon
24 MOH. News highlights. n.d. Available: https://www.moh.gov.sg/
news-highlights/details/impact-of-covid-19-on-resignation-andrecruitment-of-healthcare-professionals/
25 Tan C. More healthcare workers in S’pore quit amid growing fatigue as
covid-19 drags on. The Straits Times; 2021. Available: https://www.
straitstimes.com/singapore/politics/more-healthcare-workers-in-sporeresigning-amid-growing-fatigue-as-covid-19-drags
26 Huang WL, Liao SL, Huang HL, et al. A case study of lean digital
transformation through robotic process automation in healthcare.
Sci Rep 2024;14:14626. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/
s41598-024-65715-9
27 Chian L. SGH patients can now track medication balance inapp, collect medicine from selected fscs. The Straits Times;
2022. Available: https://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/health/
sgh-patients-can-now-track-medication-balance-in-app-collectmedicines-from-select-family-service-centres
BMJ Open Quality: first published as 10.1136/bmjoq-2024-003150 on 24 March 2025. Downloaded from https://bmjopenquality.bmj.com on 7 November 2025 by guest.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.