2010. Packt Publishing.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST) 351727; Todd Biske; SOA Governance : SOA
Governance - Find the Key to Successful SOA Adoption in Your Organization with This Book and EBook Account:eds.
SOA Governance
The key to successful SOA adoption in
your organization
Todd Biske
 BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
[ FM-2 ]
SOA Governance
The key to successful SOA adoption in your organization
Copyright © 2008 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy of
the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is sold
without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, Packt Publishing,
nor its dealers or distributors will be held liable for any damages caused or alleged to
be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all the
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals.
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: October 2008
Production Reference: 1061008
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
32 Lincoln Road
Olton
Birmingham, B27 6PA, UK.
ISBN 978-1-847195-86-9
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by Nilesh Mohite (nilpreet2000@yahoo.co.in)
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
[ FM-3 ]
Credits
Author
Todd Biske
Reviewers
Swaminathan Chandrasekaran
William Laurent
Acquisition Editors
Sarah Cullington
Adil Ahmed
Technical Editor
Dhiraj Chandiramani
Editorial Team Leader
Akshara Aware
Project Manager
Abhijeet Deobhakta
Project Coordinator
Leena Purkait
Indexer
Monica Ajmera
Proofreader
Laura Booth
Production Coordinator
Shantanu Zagade
Cover Work
Shantanu Zagade
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
[ FM-4 ]
About the Author
Todd Biske is a Senior Enterprise Architect with Monsanto in St. Louis, Missouri.
He has over 15 years of experience in Information Technology, both as a corporate
practitioner and as a consultant, working with companies involved with Agriculture,
Atmospheric Sciences, Financial Services, Insurance, and Travel and Leisure. His
interests include Service-Oriented Architecture, Systems Management Technologies,
Usability, and Human-Computer Interaction. He has a M.S. degree in Computer
Science from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, is a member of the
SOA Consortium, is a frequent conference presenter, and writes a popular blog on
strategic IT topics at http://www.biske.com/blog/.
When Todd isn't working or blogging, he spends the vast majority of his time
enjoying life with his wife Andrea, and their three children, Elena, Spencer,
and Maria. This typically involves one or more of the following (sometimes
simultaneously): assisting in the construction of Lego spaceships and vehicles,
playing various Wii games, coaching baseball teams, watching soccer games,
cheering for the St. Louis Cardinals, attending Broadway musicals when they come
through town, and maybe, if there's any time left (there usually isn't) reading some
good fiction.
There are many people I'd like to thank. First, I thank my colleagues
at Monsanto for their support of this effort. Second, a big thank
you to Brenda Michelson and the SOA Consortium for advice
and conversation. Third, I thank my past colleagues and friends
at previous jobs, for without those experiences this book would
not have been possible. Fourth, I'd like to thank the staff at Packt
Publishing, including Adil Ahmed, Patricia Weir, Leena Purkait, and
Sarah Cullington for their assistance in this effort. Finally, and most
importantly, I thank my wife and family for encouraging me to take
this challenge on, and for their sacrifice of family time so that this
book could become a reality.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
[ FM-5 ]
About the Reviewers
Swami Chandrasekaran a Senior SOA Solutions Architect with IBM, has more
than 12 years of progressive experience in the areas focused on strategy, architecture,
implementation, and delivery of large scale strategic IT solutions. His credits include
technical and strategic interface with various senior executive and institutions,
including Fortune 100/500 companies, U.S. and international clients.
In his current role at IBM, as a visionary and senior member of the client services
organization, he leads pre-sales, architecture and design of service-oriented
applications for their key clients and partners. He is also the Co-Lead Architect and
SME for the WebSphere Business Services Fabric Telecom Content Pack product.
His current areas of passion include Service Oriented and Composite Applications,
Semantic Web, Next Generation Service Delivery Platforms, and Enterprise
Architecture Visualization. He lives with his family in Dallas, TX and during his
free time he blogs at http://blog.nirvacana.com. He has authored several
articles featured in "BearingPoint Institute for Thought Leadership" and also hold
several patent disclosures. He previously worked for BearingPoint and also for
Ericsson Wireless Research. Swami hold's a Bachelor's and Master's degree in
Electrical Engineering.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
[ FM-6 ]
William Laurent is one of the world's leading experts in information strategy,
and Business Intelligence and Governance. For more than 15 years he has advised
numerous companies and governments on technology strategy, methodologies, and
best practices. He is a regularly featured writer and columnist for DM Review where
he writes about IT and corporate governance. In addition, he serves as Contributing
Editor for Dashboard Insight. William has taught at Baruch College and Columbia
University. He runs an independent consulting company that bears his name, and
lectures frequently on various technology and business topics worldwide.
Mr. Laurent is the former President of National Information Management and
currently resides in New York City metro area and Tokyo Japan. He would enjoy
your comments at wlaurent@williamlaurent.com.
Much thanks goes out to my family for their constant encouragement
and optimism; especially to Rion for her love; to my mentors in
Japan and the USA; and to Glen Michael.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Table of Contents
Preface 1
Chapter 1: The Essence of SOA Governance 5
What is Governance? 5
Desired Behavior 6
People 6
Policies 7
Process 8
What is IT Governance? 10
What is SOA? 10
Services in IT 11
What is SOA Governance? 14
People 15
Policies 16
Processes 16
Is All this Needed? 16
Summary 17
Chapter 2: Extending Project Governance for SOA 19
Beginning the SOA Journey 19
The First Milestone 22
The Second Milestone 24
The Opportunity 26
Beginning Your SOA Journey 29
Key Project Roles 29
The Service Contract 30
Adding SOA to Traditional Project Governance 33
Service Implementation Technologies 34
Service Communication Technologies 36
WS-I Compliance 37
Security Credentials 37
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Table of Contents
[ ii ]
Service Interface Specification 37
Using a Canonical Model 40
Web Services, POX over HTTP, and REST 42
Summary 43
Chapter 3: Avoiding a Bunch of Services 45
Undirected Service Creation 45
Effort One: Hot Potato 46
Effort Two: What Customer Service? 49
Effort Three: Where Did They Go? 50
The SOA Center of Excellence 51
Enterprise SOA Governance 55
Establishing Goals 55
Roles 57
Enterprise Architecture 58
Information Architecture 58
IT Management 59
Business Management 59
Developers 59
Analysts 59
Database Analysts (DBAs) 60
Center of Excellence 60
Engagement Model 61
Design-Time Checkpoints 63
Analysis Checkpoint 64
Architecture Checkpoint 64
Design Checkpoint 65
Implementation Checkpoints 66
Operational Readiness Checkpoint 66
Service Portfolio Management 67
The Service Registry/Repository 67
Summary 69
Chapter 4: Service Versioning 71
Making a Change 71
The Chief Information Officer's Concern 78
The COE Tackles Service Versioning Policies 79
Service Versioning Policies 82
Explicit or Implicit Versioning 83
Extending the Service Contract 85
Policy-Driven Infrastructure 85
Applying Policy 88
Enterprise Service Bus 89
XML Appliances 90
Service Management Platforms 90
Service Invocation and Exposure Frameworks 91
Conceptual View 92
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Service Lifecycle Management 92
Monitoring 94
Management 95
Marketing 95
Summary 96
Chapter 5: Governing the Analysis Process 99
Building the Right Services 99
Analysis for SOA 109
Business Process Analysis 110
Business Capability Mapping 112
Business Capability Analysis 118
Project Inception Checkpoints 119
Summary 120
Chapter 6: Governing Run-Time Behavior 123
Preparing for Partner Services 123
The First Sign of Trouble 125
Day Two 126
Day Three 127
Day Four 129
Testing the Solution 132
Run-Time SOA Governance and the Service Contract 133
Ensuring Consistent Performance 134
Metric Collection 134
Preventing Consumer Starvation 137
Defining Service Consumer Baselines 139
Defining Service Provider Baselines 140
Managing Run-time Usage 142
Detecting Potential Problems 143
Synthetic Transactions 143
Predictive Analysis 144
Service Management Technologies 145
Summary 148
Chapter 7: SOA Success 151
Celebrating Success 151
Changing Behavior 158
The Inherent Risk of Governance 159
Changing Governance Over Time 160
Summary 161
Chapter 8: Establishing SOA Governance at Your Organization 163
People 164
Solution Architect 165
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Table of Contents
[ iv ]
Business Analyst 165
Technical Lead/Domain Architect 166
Enterprise Architect/Technology Architect 166
Information Architect 167
Security Architect 168
IT Manager 168
Service Manager/Owner 169
Platform Manager 169
Other Stakeholders 171
Organizing Your People 171
Enterprise Architecture Driven 172
Center of Excellence/Competency Center 173
Review Boards 175
Common Challenges 175
Policies 177
Pre-Project Governance 177
Artifacts 177
Policies for Pre-Project Governance 179
Project Governance 180
Artifacts 181
Policies for Project Governance 189
Run-time Governance 190
Policy-Driven Infrastructure 191
Service Contracts 194
Policies for Run-Time Governance 195
SOA Governance Processes 196
Establishing Desired Behavior and Policies 197
Education and Communication 198
Policy Enforcement 199
Measurement and Improvement 200
SOA Governance Technologies 201
Service Registry/Repository 201
Service Testing Platforms 203
Enterprise Service Bus 204
XML Appliances and Security Gateways 204
Service Management Platforms 205
Service Invocation and Exposure Frameworks 206
Summary 206
Appendix: Cast of Characters 209
Index 211
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Preface
In order to provide appropriate context for the concepts and techniques that can help
you implement appropriate SOA Governance, this book will tell a story of a fictional
company, Advasco. You will follow key members of the company, including:
Andrea, the CIO of Advasco
Spencer, an Enterprise Architect
Elena, the Chief Architect
Maria, the Service Manager
In each chapter, you will hear a portion of their journey on the path to SOA adoption.
Following the narrative of their experiences will be an explanation of the situations
that arose for Advasco, along with the role that SOA Governance played in the
scenario, either through the lack of it, or through the successful application of people,
policies, and process.
What This Book Covers
Chapter 1 will introduce you to the concept of governance, using the familiar concept
of municipal government, introduce its core components of people, policies, and
processes, and then illustrate why these are important to the adoption of SOA within
an enterprise.
Chapter 2 will introduce you to the beginning of Advasco's SOA journey, and their
initial experiences building and consuming services.
In Chapter 3, you will find out what ensues when Advasco tries to expand on its
initial successes after some recognition and encouragement from Andrea, the CIO.
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Preface
[ ]
Chapter 4 will take you through the experiences of Advasco when one of their
production services needs to be upgraded to a new version and support the needs of
a new consumer.
Chapter 5 brings Advasco to the inevitable let down after its initial success
and addresses the steps that the company takes to keep the SOA effort
progressing forward.
Chapter 6 explores the world of run-time SOA governance by discussing
the activities of Advasco after a bug in a service is exposed in the
production environment.
In Chapter 7, the changes that have occurred in Advasco over the course of their SOA
journey are summarized.
Finally, Chapter 8 provides a detailed overview of both the techniques explored in the
Advasco story, as well as other options available to you and your organization.
The Appendix shows a list of characters that appear in the Advasco story, their role,
and the chapters in which they appear.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an
explanation of their meaning.
A block of code will be set as follows:
<wsu:Timestamp xmlns:wsu="http://docs.oasis-open.org/wss/2004/01/
 oasis-200401-wss-wssecurity-utility-1.0.xsd"
 wsu:Id="Timestamp-aaddaaf5-1207-44d7-a5ab-64b6bf5f678e">
<wsu:Created>2008-05-27T21:23:25Z</wsu:Created>
</wsu:Timestamp>
New terms and important words are introduced in a bold-type font.
Important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Preface
[ ]
Reader Feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about
this book, what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for us
to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply drop an email to feedback@packtpub.com,
making sure to mention the book title in the subject of your message.
If there is a book that you need and would like to see us publish, please
send us a note in the SUGGEST A TITLE form on www.packtpub.com
or email suggest@packtpub.com.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing
or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer Support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to
help you to get the most from your purchase.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our contents, mistakes
do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in text or
code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing this you can
save other readers from frustration, and help to improve subsequent versions of
this book. If you find any errata, report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/support, selecting your book, clicking on the let us know link, and entering
the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your submission will be
accepted and the errata added to the list of existing errata. The existing errata can be
viewed by selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media.
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If
you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the Internet, please
provide the location address or website name immediately so we can pursue
a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected
pirated material.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Preface
[ ]
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you
valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem with
some aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
The Essence of
SOA Governance
What is governance? Why is it so critical to the success of an SOA adoption effort.
This chapter will introduce you to the concept of governance, using the familiar
concept of municipal government, introduce its core components of people, policies,
and processes, and then illustrate why these are important to the adoption of SOA
within an enterprise.
What is Governance?
When you hear the word "governance", what comes to mind? For most people in
information technology, it is not a positive image. If you are a typical corporate
developer, you are probably envisioning forms to fill out, presentations to prepare,
meetings in front of a review board, and more than likely, annoyance in having
to take time away from writing code for people that, in your opinion, really don't
understand what you're trying to do in the first place. Often, a developer may see
the review as nothing more than an opportunity for the reviewers to flaunt their
authority. They simply take their lumps in the review, and then everybody goes back
to doing what they were doing with no real change in behavior, other than some
additional animosity in the organization.
If you are an enterprise architect, you may be on the other side of this equation. You
are the one listening to presentations from project teams, trying to provide guidance
to ensure that the efforts go beyond the needs of the individual project, but only
encountering developers who are more interested in finding opportunities to try the
newest technologies than what is needed to meet the needs of the enterprise. Even if
the developers are able to be convinced, the required changes then get shot down by
a project manager or sponsor who won't accept the resulting change in schedule.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
The Essence of SOA Governance
[ ]
If you are a manager, especially a senior manager, you may have a completely
different take on governance. Rather than being about the efforts going on inside
a project, it's about getting projects approved. Many organizations even have a
committee called the IT Governance Committee, whose job is to review project
proposals and determine which efforts will be funded. While there normally isn't
as much pain associated with this effort, there's still potential for animosity when
managers don't understand the prioritization process used by the committee.
So why do we do it? The fact is that governance is a required and critical part of any
organization. It is the combination of people, policies, and processes that are put in
place to ensure the organization achieves one or more desired behaviors. When used
properly, it can be the difference between success and failure.
The adoption of service-oriented architecture, or SOA, has been touted as
an approach that can change the way IT operates, increasing the agility of the
organization and achieving a greater degree of alignment between IT and the rest of
the business. An effort of this nature represents a fundamental change in the way an
organization leverages information technology. It is up to governance to guide the
organization through this change.
To better understand governance, let's first look at it from a different context, one
that we all deal with on a daily basis, which is municipal government.
Desired Behavior
The city you live in is a living organization, trying to meet the needs of its
constituents and businesses alike. Nearly all cities have a desired behavior of being
a safe place where people want to raise their children and businesses want to
operate. Cities will likely vary, however, in their approach to growth. At one end, an
established city may be landlocked and may have to focus on remaining attractive
to both young and old residents, keeping the population base stable. At the other
end, areas near urban centers with plenty of open space may be experiencing rapid
growth as young professionals seek larger lots with plenty of space for kids to play.
In the middle, rural communities may be looking for slow, controlled growth to
preserve their rural heritage yet remain attractive to young families.
People
Regardless of where you live, you are likely to be subjected to many forms of
government. Your city or village may have a mayor and a city council. The churches
may have a pastor and an associated council of leaders. Your city or village may be
part of a regional government, such as a state or province with a governor or other
form of provincial leadership. That regional government is likely to be subjected to
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 1
[ ]
the oversight of the country's government, which can include a president or prime
minister, along with parliament, congress, or some other body of representatives. In
addition to these roles, one cannot forget the police force. All of these examples have
one thing in common: people who are recognized as authority figures, typically in
either a position of establishing, or enforcing, policy.
It should be known, however, that authority does not necessarily imply a
dictatorship. In many governments, it is the people that grant the authority figures
their powers through the election process, and the people typically have the
power to remove those figures from authority. While the typical corporation is
not a democracy, there are many lessons to be learned from a democratic style of
government. One must not forget that the motto of many police organizations is to
serve and protect, while legislators are representatives of the people. The correct message
is that governance is a responsibility of everyone, whether formally assigned or not.
The degree to which the governed participate in the governance process can have a
huge impact on the success or failure of the governance effort.
Policies
Simply having people is not enough. While the people may all agree on where
they want to go, it is the policies associated with the day-to-day activities of the
community that make it happen. The community must look at its desired behavior
and determine the right set of policies that will achieve that behavior. For example,
does the community want to be a bedroom community, or does it want to be a retail
hub for the region? Does it want to focus on attracting medium to large organizations
with many employees, or will it focus on smaller businesses? Will the community
stay small, or will it be on a path of continued growth, adding property, businesses,
and residents over time? Will the community allow a variety of residents and
businesses, ranging from low income housing to million dollar mansions and from
the local hardware store to a major international company? What kind of education
will the community provide for its residents?
In order to ensure that the community realizes the desired behavior, its actions
must be guided through policy. These policies will cover a range of things that are
required for the community to stay healthy and grow. It involves many different
aspects, including the speed limits on city streets, tax rates for residents and
businesses, and zoning regulations that guide the types of businesses allowed. There
are also polices that influence the activities that take place within the city, such as
specifying that a specific percentage of revenue must go towards education versus
other needs. It is likely that an IT Governance committee has similar policies that are
used in determining which projects get funded.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
The Essence of SOA Governance
[ ]
Process
As the community grows and the policies grow more and more numerous, it will
become clear that having people and policies alone are still inadequate for effective
governance. While many people will adhere to policies, not everyone will. For
some, it may be due to a deliberate action, for others, it may simply be due to lack of
awareness. In order to combat this, processes must be put in place to ensure that the
community is aware of the policies that have been created by the leaders, as well as
processes that ensure that the community is following those policies.
Take, for example, speed limits. In its earliest phases a community may not have
had any speed limits on its roads. Over time, as the community grows, a continued
increase in the number of automobile accidents may cause the leaders to establish a
speed limit on city roads: a policy. However, simply passing this law during a city
council meeting is unlikely to change behavior. The first thing the leaders must do
is educate the community on the new policy, and they do so by placing speed limit
signs on the roads in question. In addition, a driver's education course is created and
all new drivers, or drivers that are renewing their licenses, are required to complete
it successfully before receiving their new or renewed license. These processes will
certainly increase the adherence to the policy, but just as many drivers on the road
today ignore speed limit signs and so it may not achieve the levels desired by the
leader. To achieve the desired behavior, the city council decides that a police force is
necessary to enforce the policies. Through the use of radar guns the police are able
to detect when automobiles are out of compliance with the stated policies, and can
institute appropriate punishment in the form of warnings, fines, or other loss
of privileges.
Processes are frequently the difference between good governance and poor
governance. All too often, the negative view of governance is a result of an
over-emphasis on policy enforcement. This can frequently result in a
command-and-control culture, which can create animosity in an organization.
Perhaps, even more important than enforcement processes are communication and
education processes. By educating the residents and businesses on the policies first,
it is far easier to achieve compliance. Likewise, the authorities must have an open
ear, and listen to where policies are actually counter-productive to the goals of
the community. Finally, just as the people and businesses are held accountable for
adherence to the policies, the authorities must be held accountable for their actions,
with the people having the ability to remove leaders that are not acting in the best
interest of the constituents or if the desired behaviors are not being achieved.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 1
[ ]
It is important to realize that no two governments are alike. In communities where
the residents have a high degree of trust in the leaders, and agreement on the
direction and policies, the community may not need as many enforcement processes
as the residents naturally adhere to the policies as it is in their best interest. In
communities where the residents do not trust the leaders of the organization, due
to corruption or other factors, policies may not be followed, and as a result, the
community may have to invest far more heavily in education and more likely,
enforcement through the police force.
These aspects are the essence of governance: desired behavior, people, policies,
and process. The desired behavior is achieved through a successful combination
of people, policies, and processes. People are the leaders that are responsible for
establishing the desired behavior of the organization, policies are the rules that
express the desired behavior, and process ensures that the policies are followed.
Just as no two governments will operate in exactly the same manner, with the same
structure, the same holds true for information technology organizations. They will
each have their own leadership structure, desired behavior, policies, and processes. If
the desired behavior is being achieved, the governance is successful.
PROCESSES
Educate
Measure Enforce
Governing Body
(People)
Create
POLICY
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
The Essence of SOA Governance
[ 10 ]
What is IT Governance?
While it easy to put governance into the context of municipal or regional
governments, it is not limited to this domain. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act increased
awareness of the term corporate governance. A key aspect of Sarbanes-Oxley was
to ensure that the corporate boards (the people responsible for governance) of
publicly-traded companies in the United States take individual responsibility for
the accuracy and completeness of financial reports. In addition, there were new
standards established for compliance audits of these companies. In order to be
compliant, companies had to introduce new policies associated with a variety
of corporate activities. On top of that, it was certainly in the company's best interest
to perform their own audits and ensure compliance with these policies through
internal processes prior to the official audits by an independent auditor. While
Sarbanes-Oxley may not touch on all aspects of corporate governance, it certainly
serves to demonstrate how people, policies, and processes are an inherent part.
In the case of Sarbanes-Oxley, the primary concern is governing the financial
accounting practices, with the desired behavior being articulated as part of it.
Another part of corporate governance, however, is the desired behavior of the use
of information technology, which is known as IT Governance. Remaining consistent
with the earlier definition of governance, IT Governance is defined as the people,
policies, and processes that an organization leverages to ensure the appropriate
behaviors and outcomes in respect to the organization's utilization of information
technology. In many organizations, the face of IT Governance is the review board
(people) that make decisions on which efforts receive funding, and which do not.
However, IT governance does not end there. Many organizations also have Portfolio
Management Organizations, or PMOs, that ensure that the efforts, once funded, are
properly prioritized, staffed, and executed in a consistent and appropriate manner.
The PMOs must establish policies that define what consistent and appropriate
means, and then ensure that the projects are compliant with those policies.
What is SOA?
Before we delve into governance within the context of SOA, we first need to define
what SOA is. The first step in this is to define what we mean by service. One of
the many definitions provided by the Merriam-Webster dictionary (http://www.
merriam-webster.com/) for service is a facility supplying some public demand. The
key parts of this definition are facility which means that some capability or function
is performed, supplying which means that the function is provided to consumers,
and public demand which means it's something that one or more consumers
actually want. A SOA, therefore, is quite simply, an architecture that utilizes the core
concepts of service providers and service consumers to define a system.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
Building on our example of a municipality, the community may initially have started
as a collection of homes, each with their own well for water, garden for food, and so
on. Over time, however, the residents realized the need for some common services. It
may have begun with residents each contributing property for a common road that
connects their houses. In other areas, it was likely focused on the economies of scale,
such as a public school system, a shared source of water, sanitation services, and as
technology evolved, communications and media services. As these services evolved,
the impact on individual residents varied widely. Some residents had designed their
homes in such a way that a transition from their private well to a public water source
was an inexpensive effort. Other residents, however, had far greater expenses in
adapting their internal plumbing to the fixtures required by the public source. The
municipality can be viewed as a collection of these services, with the municipality
acting as the provider of the services and its residents as the consumer of
the services.
While this definition may seem simple, it captures the essence of what SOA is all
about: breaking down a system into a collection of consumers and providers. The
key to a successful SOA, however, is ensuring that the right services are provided
and that the relationships between consumers and providers are formally established
and managed. A city that has a complicated maze of pothole-laden roads, unreliable
electricity, poor schools, high taxes, along with a city council that was appointed for
life is not going to be a pleasant place to live. Are they providing services? Yes. Are
they providing them well? No. Is the relationship between the constituents and city
healthy, given that the council members are assured a paycheck for life, regardless of
whether any improvements are made? Probably not.
Services in IT
If we compare this to the typical corporate IT department, individual applications are
similar to the homesteads provided in a new community. Many of these applications
are currently implementing capabilities in their own, private manner, even
though there are many applications within the enterprise that implement the same
capability. Some of these capabilities will be pure infrastructure, such as security and
logging, but others will be business capabilities such as customer management and
order processing.
Just as some of our homeowners had a higher cost associated with utilizing the
public services, the same thing holds true in the world of corporate information
technology. Many applications are hampered by an inflexible design such that the
cost of change is now prohibitive. This shouldn't be considered a result of poor
decisions taken years ago, but rather the normal course of growth. It is unlikely that
all homeowners could have anticipated the changes that would happen over the
years, and equally unlikely, if not more, that application designers could anticipate
the technology advances that have occurred over the last twenty years.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
The Essence of SOA Governance
[ 12 ]
One key difference between the typical corporate enterprise and typical community,
however, is that all things in the enterprise exist for the good of the enterprise,
and not as independent entities. When an individual homeowner chose to build
in an inflexible manner, the only one impacted by this inflexibility was the
homeowner. The community, as a whole, is likely not impacted by this. For the
corporate enterprise, however, an inflexible application is another story. As long
as that application is still necessary for the enterprise, the cost associated with
that inflexibility will grow larger and larger. Just as a community can bulldoze a
dilapidated property, an enterprise can choose to scrap an application and rewrite,
but that comes at a large expense.
In order to prevent the continued cycle of inflexibility, an enterprise must move
away from today's state where the information technology assets are largely viewed
as a collection of individual applications and their data to a state where the assets are
viewed as a collection of capabilities provided as services. This is a very important
distinction, because many enterprises have simply taken existing applications,
rewritten sections of them as services, and think that they're adopting SOA. When
it comes down to it, however, they still have the same applications, and those
applications still have the same integration challenges. For example, the typical
enterprise has a collection of applications as shown in the following figure:
Application
User
Interface
Business
Logic
Data
Application
User
Interface
Business
Logic
Data
Application
User
Interface
Business
Logic
Data
When the need arose for these applications to communicate, the generally accepted
approach was to create an adapter that acts as the glue that connects the two
applications. For each new pair of applications that need to be integrated, a new
adapter would be created, adding more and more complexity over time.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
Application
User
Interface
Business
Logic
Data
Application
User
Interface
Business
Logic
Data
Application
User
Interface
Business
Logic
Data
Adapter Adapter
Adapter
To get out of this endless cycle of adding more and more adapters in the middle,
which adds complexity, the enterprise needs to move away from application
oriented architecture. Application oriented architecture is where the core unit used to
describe the enterprise is an application. It therefore follows that SOA, simply stated,
is an architecture whose core unit of composition is a service. If we take the diagrams
above and eliminate the boundaries of the application, we get a picture that looks
like the following:
User
Interface
Service
Business
Service
Data
Service
User
Interface
Service
Business
Service
Data
Service
User
Interface
Service
Business
Service
Data
Service
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
The Essence of SOA Governance
[ 14 ]
When these boundaries are eliminated, the enterprise can now be viewed as a
collection of service consumers and service providers that are expected to operate
as a community. This is instead of being viewed as a collection of individual
applications that have no clear indication of where capabilities are shared, and
inconsistent internal structures that do not support future change or integration
needs. User interface components and all business logic services are built in a
consistent, composable manner, and all data resources are exposed in a consistent,
composable manner as shown in the following figure:
User
Interface
Service
Business
Service
Data
Service
User
Interface
Service
Business
Service
Data
Service
User
Interface
Service
Business
Service
Data
Service
Presentation
Services
Business
Services
Data
Services
This approach doesn't prevent individual services from being highly customized
for a particular need. What it does do, however, is to ensure that we still build for
agility. If the end result is that a particular business service only has one consumer,
that's still okay.
Adopting SOA and moving away from application oriented architecture will allow
information technology to lead the enterprise to progress into the future, rather than
being perceived as the anchor holding the enterprise back.
What is SOA Governance?
Given the understanding we now have of governance in general, and of service
oriented architecture and the desired behaviors it intends to achieve, what is SOA
governance and why is it important? SOA governance is the combination of people,
policies, and processes within your organization that will ensure that the desired
behaviors of your strategic SOA initiative are achieved.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 1
[ 15 ]
It includes the traditional areas associated with IT Governance, which is the
selection and funding of IT projects. These projects define the initial scope for
technology utilization and can either help or hinder the SOA effort, based upon the
scope chosen.
The SOA effort only gets executed through projects, and if the execution is poor,
the SOA effort will be poor. Therefore, the project governance activities of an
organization must be adjusted to include policies associated with achieving the
desired behaviors associated with SOA adoption.
However, it doesn't stop there; the behavior of the IT solutions and the teams that
support them may also require changes. The redefinition of boundaries associated
with technology solutions can result in new operational activities and a greater need
to respond quickly to changes without having a ripple effect through the systems.
Run-time governance must be leveraged to ensure the systems and the organizations
supporting them operate as efficiently as possible.
People
The people involved with SOA governance will mainly include the same people
involved with your current IT and Project governance efforts. New artifacts may
be required to help establish appropriate policies for SOA success. If the existing
governance efforts are poor or unsuccessful, it may be necessary to bring in new
people or a new approach to your governance efforts. Individuals involved will
include senior leadership from both within and outside of IT, enterprise architects,
technology architects, development managers, business architects/senior business
analysts, and more. The SOA effort cannot be viewed as just an IT operation. While
the IT department may oversee a significant portion of the SOA efforts, if those
efforts are not in alignment with the desired behavior of the organization as a whole,
conflict will arise. This would also be the case if a city was out of alignment with
the state or province, or if the state or province was out of alignment with the
federal government.
The constituents of the organization are both the IT staff involved in the construction
of services and their consumers, the business users that utilize the IT solutions, and
in many cases, an organization's partners that may interact via services.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
The Essence of SOA Governance
[ 16 ]
Policies
The policies that the people involved with the SOA governance effort create must
guide the organization towards the desired behavior of the SOA effort. If the effort is
intended to reduce the costs associated with the typical IT development effort, what
are the policies that will result in that outcome? If the effort is intended to reduce the
time required to make system changes in response to regulatory changes that occur
on a regular basis, what are the policies that will result in the outcome? What are the
policies that will ensure that the SOA adoption effort won't have a negative effect
on the organization by the resulting increase in moving parts putting new strains
on inefficient operational processes? If the organization simply constructs services
without any change in their behaviors, it is unlikely that the desired outcome will be
achieved, and the organization will be at risk of having SOA be seen as yet another
overhyped IT effort that promised to save the world and failed.
Processes
Finally, SOA governance must involve processes for policy creation, communication
and education, enforcement, and measurement. It must focus on communication and
collaboration first, so it is not seen as a heavy-handed dictatorship. If it is understood
and embraced, enforcement will be a simpler task because the staff will want to
be compliant, rather than being forced to be compliant. Finally, the effort must
be continually measured so that the leaders themselves are held accountable, and
changes can be enacted if the desired behaviors are not being achieved.
Is All this Needed?
But why is all of this needed? Aren't we already choosing what applications to
build, funding those projects, and designing and deploying those solutions? Before
you embark on your SOA journey, there is one critical question that must be asked.
Does your organization need to change? If the answer is no, then there's no reason
to keep reading. If the answer is yes, based on the fact that you're reading this
book, which is probably the case, then you need SOA governance. Simply viewing
SOA as a technology-based solution where you choose to use XML, SOAP, and
HTTP technologies in place of Enterprise Java Beans, DCOM, CORBA, or any other
distributed computing technology is not a change in behavior. Your organization
will still be building the same solutions it always has, just with a different set
of technologies.
The real challenge behind SOA is not choosing technologies appropriately; it is
changing the behavior of the organization so that it can improve. Governance is all
about guiding behavior of an organization, so it is understandable that the key to
being successful with SOA is governance.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 1
[ 17 ]
Without SOA governance, the information technology assets of an enterprise are,
at best, a collection of independent solutions that are primarily related through
proximity. Integration is seen as something to be avoided as much as possible, and
where required, is done so as a necessary evil, frequently in a suboptimal manner.
With SOA governance, the information technology assets of an enterprise are a
collection of interoperating solutions that through effective people, policies, and
processes, collectively meet the needs today and of the future for the business
organization as a whole.
Summary
In this chapter, we've learned that governance is necessary to ensure that the
organization achieves its desired behaviors, whether that organization is a city, a
country, a business, or an IT department. This is done through a combination of three
things: people, policies, and processes. People are the leaders that are responsible
for establishing the desired behavior of the organization, policies are the rules that
express the desired behavior, and process ensures that the policies are followed.
We learned that SOA is a new approach where the information technology assets are
viewed as a collection of services and consumers. These services and their consumers
are expected to operate as a community from day one, rather than being viewed
as a collection of individual applications that lack clarity on where capabilities are
shared, and have inconsistent internal structures that do not support future change
or integration needs.
This shift from application oriented architecture to SOA is a fundamental change to
the way that IT operates and likely a change in the way that the business interacts
with IT. A change of this scope represents new behaviors, and the way to achieve
these desired behaviors is governance.
In the next chapter you will be introduced to the fictional company and its
employees that will be used throughout this book and learn about their initial efforts
in adopting SOA, and how governance, or the lack thereof, played a role in their
successes and their failures.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Extending Project
Governance for SOA
Every organization's journey to SOA adoption must begin somewhere. Some
organizations may take a very top-down approach based upon direction from the
Chief Information Officer (CIO) or other senior IT leader, while other organizations
may begin with a grass-roots effort from within the IT organization, often times
during a single project. This chapter will begin the story of Advasco and describe
the beginning of their SOA journey, which falls into the latter. Through their initial
experiences you will learn about the role of SOA governance within the typical
project governance efforts.
Beginning the SOA Journey
Spencer walked in through the main doors of Advasco, a leading financial
conglomerate, on Monday morning knowing it was going to be a busy day. He was
part of the Enterprise Architecture team at Advasco, and immediately headed for his
weekly meeting with his boss, Elena, the Chief Architect. "Come on in, Spencer," she
said. "As you know, we've been given a big challenge over the next few months."
Late last week, the head of the sales and marketing for the insurance division
announced that they needed to improve the way they interacted with their
customers. Advasco began as a typical financial services company, but had recently
expanded into the insurance area through acquisition. They began by acquiring a
company that provided homeowner's policies in several Midwest states. Over the
next few years, Advasco had acquired several other regional insurance companies.
This resulted in an increase in the number of insurance products that it offered, as
well as turning Advasco into a nationwide provider. Unfortunately, Advasco was
struggling to increase the number of insurance products per customer. Analysis of
the situation had determined that while the sales staff of the original organizations
had been combined, each of the different insurance products relied on different
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Extending Project Governance for SOA
[ 20 ]
applications for customer management. As a result, it was far more difficult for
the sales agents to know what insurance products any given customer had. After
discussing it with Mike, the IT manager supporting insurance products, IT was given
the task of providing the sales agents and marketing staff for the insurance division
with a single view of the customer.
Elena then said to him, "I had a meeting with Mike to discuss their new initiative to
provide a single view of the customer to the sales agents and marketing staff. While
he has some great developers in his area, he asked me if Enterprise Architecture
could provide some architectural guidance to their effort. Given the excellent
integration work you did when Advasco acquired our first company in the insurance
area, I think you'd do a great job on this effort."
"It certainly sounds like an exciting project," said Spencer, "I'd love to help out. Just
last week, I met with my own insurance agent and saw first hand the frustration he
had in trying to see the different insurance products that I have for my family."
"I'm glad to hear that," said Elena, "I'd like you to meet with Mike today and start
coming up with an architecture for the effort. I know you've been reading about
SOA. Perhaps this effort can serve as a good pilot for some of the techniques."
Spencer agreed. He left Elena's office and went to his desk to set up a meeting with
Mike. This was going to be an exciting effort. This initiative was highly visible
within the organization, since Advasco's customer approval rating had been taking a
beating over the past two years.
In addition, Elena knew that Spencer had been researching SOA. In his reading, he
felt that SOA had great potential to change the way that Advasco built applications.
This effort would provide an opportunity to try out some of the technologies
associated with it.
Later that afternoon, Spencer met with Mike to go through the existing applications.
Mike said, "Unfortunately, the situation is a mess. Right now, the application that
handles our auto insurance business is completely independent from the application
that handles our home insurance business. The same thing is true for the life
insurance business. They each have their own databases, requiring our agents to
enter all of the customer information in multiple times. It creates a nightmare for
our billing department, especially when trying to compute discounts for multiple
policy holders. These applications have all been built using different technologies,
including COBOL, VB.NET, and Java."
Spencer said, "Well, let's take a managed approach to this effort. Which are the two
insurance lines where we most frequently see repeat customers?"
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 2
[ 21 ]
Mike replied, "The most common case is for a customer to hold both an auto
insurance policy and a homeowner's policy. It's an easy way to get a multiple
policy discount."
"Well, why don't we start with those two systems and see what we can do. I've been
reading about SOA and I think it could provide the right approach for this effort."
"I'll trust you on this one Spencer. Elena spoke very highly of you in our meeting
last week. As long as you don't think adopting new approaches will impact the
timelines, I'm okay with it. The insurance sales and marketing group is under a
ton of pressure to get our customer approval rating back up where it should be as
quickly as possible."
The next day, Spencer met with the managers responsible for the auto insurance
systems and the home insurance systems. Spencer kicked off the meeting, "We're
here to discuss how we can make things better for our sales staff. Right now, they
have to deal with two separate applications. As a result, sometimes they don't know
when they're dealing with someone who is already a customer. Other times, we
wind up with inconsistent records across the two systems, or have problems keeping
records up-to-date when a customer moves."
Tim, the manager for the auto insurance systems immediately jumped into the
conversation, "If we could get the home insurance system to use our customer
database, our problems would go away."
Adil, the manager for the home insurance systems, responded to Tim, "We've spent
the last 15 years evolving our application and database. It would be much more
expensive for us to try to move all our data into your system."
Spencer could sense the tension in the room. Both of these managers had invested
many years in their systems, and neither one wanted to relinquish any amount of
control. "I don't think consolidating the data will work with the timelines we've
been given. What I'd like to do is to create a new customer information service that
will provide an abstraction layer in front of both of your databases. You'll both
need to modify your applications to use the service rather than going directly to the
database, but the service will ensure that both systems remain in sync. In addition,
you'll have access to additional information about the customers in each other's
systems that you can now incorporate into your applications. Then, at a later time,
we can pursue consolidating the databases into a single one. With the service in
place, you won't need to make any changes to the front end of your applications
when that occurs."
Adil said, "How are you going to make this work? My system leverages a Java
front-end talking to our mainframe, while Tim's system is based completely on
Microsoft technologies?"
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Extending Project Governance for SOA
[ 22 ]
Spencer responded, "I think this a great opportunity to leverage web services
technology. It claims to provide interoperability across these platforms, let's give
it a try."
Tim said, "Who's going to write this service?"
Spencer suggested, "Since we need to incorporate information from both of your
systems, I suggest that we form a team with a developer from each of your groups to
design and build the new service."
Adil and Tim agreed, and told Spencer that they would let him know what
developers they would contribute to the effort.
Spencer went back to his desk and knew that he had a real challenge on his hands.
While the managers involved had committed developers to the effort, he also
sensed that there was some hesitancy about the effort. They knew that changes were
needed, but it was clear that neither one wanted to give up the control they currently
had over their systems. He was hoping that the right developers would get assigned.
He knew that many of them had complained about the redundancy that existed
across the various applications, but the scope and timeline of their projects prevented
them from doing anything about it. This effort was beginning with the right scope, so
as long they met timelines, there was a good chance to make it happen.
Over the next few weeks, Spencer's team, including the developers from Adil and
Tim's organizations, worked hard to define the new Customer service that both
applications would use. The developers were very familiar with the current data
models used by each application, and worked together to define the data models and
schemas for the new service. While these developers had some knowledge of how
the existing applications manipulated the data, they worked solely with each other
in defining the functional interface of the service. In the end, the service interface
contained some elements of Customer data that was specific to one of the two
applications, but they felt that information could be safely ignored by the
other application.
The First Milestone
Soon afterwards, Spencer met with Jennifer, the project manager for the auto
insurance application, to discuss their schedule. Spencer said, "Hi Jennifer. I wanted
to discuss our delivery schedule with you so we can ensure that you can integrate
the new Customer service as part of your effort. I know you're making some
additional changes to the application besides the migration to the service."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 2
[ 23 ]
Jennifer took a glance at her project plan and told Spencer, "We're currently planning
on going live on October 6th. Our performance tests are planned for September 2nd,
and user testing will begin on July 28th."
Spencer said, "Okay, we'll plan on targeting those same dates for our service. Don't
hesitate to contact me if you need anything else."
Jennifer didn't. Just two weeks later she sent him an email that said, "Spencer, my
developers want to know when they'll have a service they can test against. They've
told me that they can't do anymore work until it's available."
Spencer replied, "I'll have one of my developers provide you the URL for our
development service right away." He had his team provide it, and didn't hear
anything back from Jennifer's team, so he assumed everything was working well.
That lasted for about one week when Jennifer came storming into his cubicle.
"What did you do to the service? We were going to demonstrate where we were to
one of our users today, and the application crashed when we tried retrieving data,"
she said. It was clear that it had not been a good morning for her.
"We've been testing the integration with the home insurance data system, and have
run into some issues, so our development environment has been up and down all
day long as we try to determine what the problem is," he replied.
"Well, you'd better get it fixed soon. I now have a key user who's very nervous about
the stability of this new service-based approach, and my developers are simply
telling me that they can't do anything about it. I'm going to report this as a serious
issue in our Project Management Office (PMO) update on Thursday."
"I'll get right on it, Jennifer. I apologize for this and we'll get it fixed as quickly as
we can."
Spencer immediately realized where his mistake was. By giving Jennifer's team
the URL for the service in his development environment, he was exposing her
application to all of the instability that is normally associated with any development
environment. From her perspective, however, she didn't care about his development
environment; she needed something that was stable so she could execute her tests
and provide demonstrations.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Extending Project Governance for SOA
[ 24 ]
He gathered his developers and told them that they needed to create a stable version
of the service that would be separate from their own development efforts that the
auto insurance application could use. He suggested that they determine which of
their iterations represented a key milestone from the perspective of the auto insurance
application. When those iterations were successfully completed, it would be promoted
to the stable environment in use by the auto insurance application. They implemented
this plan and things got better, at least from Jennifer's perspective.
Unfortunately, Jennifer wasn't the only project manager whose effort was
dependent on Spencer's team. Mark was the project manager for the home insurance
application, the other consumer of this new service. Like his initial meeting with
Jennifer, Spencer met with Mark to find out what his plans were for the home
insurance application. Like Jennifer, there were additional changes that Mark was
putting into the application in addition to migrating to the new Customer service.
Mark said, "We need to get our application into production by September 15th. There
are some new regulations that have been passed, and we need to incorporate them
into our application by then or else we can be subject to fines. We plan on beginning
active user testing two months before then."
Spencer replied, "Your dates are pretty close to Jennifer's, so I think we'll be okay.
We've already set up a stable version of the service for her project, so I'll send the
information to you, and your developers can begin testing against it as soon as
they'd like."
"That would be great. I know that it's important that we start using your service, so
I'm glad that the timelines look good right now. It's very important that our dates are
met. I absolutely must deliver no later than September 15th."
The Second Milestone
Spencer passed this information back to his development team and everything was
going well until the second milestone release went out. Jennifer's team received
the latest interface definition, which included the next set of functionality that her
team was going to test. Unfortunately, her developers were not at all happy with
the results. Spencer's team had determined the operations to expose in the web
service-based solely upon their past knowledge of the applications that would be
using it. Unfortunately, some significant changes had occurred to the applications,
and their knowledge was out of date. The way in which they had represented the
data in the operation was a complete mismatch to the processing model within the
auto insurance application. While all the data was there, the way in which the data
was organized would require Jennifer's team to completely disassemble the data and
reassemble it in the data structures necessary. This had the potential of impacting
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 2
[ 25 ]
her team's delivery schedule. Jennifer discussed this with Spencer, and he agreed to
modify the service interface according to what her developers needed. This wound
up being a relatively simple change for Spencer's team, so it was pushed out as part
of the next iteration, two weeks later. That day was no better.
"Spencer, what happened to the service?" Mark said, with a clear sense of irritation
in his voice. "We had integrated our application with the last milestone release, and
then you go and change all the operations out from underneath us. What gives?"
"Mark, I'm sorry I didn't let you know about those changes. Jennifer, the project
manager for the auto insurance upgrade project, wasn't happy with the last
milestone release as her developers would have had to do significant rework in order
to accommodate the interface design."
"Spencer, what am I supposed to do now? Your changes will now require significant
rework in my application to accommodate these new interface changes, and I can't
afford any more slips in my schedule."
"Let me set up a meeting with you and Jennifer so we can find an approach that will
work with both of your schedules. I'll get it set up for this afternoon," said Spencer.
That afternoon, Spencer met with Mark and Jennifer to discuss the state of affairs.
Neither of them was happy about the situation.
"Spencer, I can't take on any more development tasks right now. My team is already
struggling to make the necessary changes for these regulatory changes in the time we
have left. I can't afford to have them make changes that we didn't need because your
team decided to change the service from underneath us," said Mark.
Jennifer replied, "Mark, your project isn't the only one that's important. I've got just
as much pressure on me to get this project delivered, and that original interface
would have added about three weeks onto my schedule."
Spencer was regretting not having involved Mark and Jennifer's teams back when
the original interface design decisions were made. He had trusted that by having
developers who had previously worked on both of those applications they would
have known what operations would work best for each, but that clearly wasn't the
case. While he didn't want to do it, he knew that he had to make sacrifices within his
project in order to meet both Mark and Jennifer's needs. He asked, "Mark, if we put
the original operations back in the service interface in our next iteration, would that
work for you? It would be available within two weeks. Jennifer, we'd leave the new
operations in the interface. While I'd like to only provide this functionality in one
way, I realize that in order to meet both of your schedules, this is the only way that
can be done."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Extending Project Governance for SOA
[ 26 ]
Mark and Jennifer thought about this option, and they both agreed that they could
make this work. All three of them agreed to continue meeting on a regular basis
to ensure that there would be no more surprises throughout the rest of the effort.
Spencer left the meeting very relieved that he was able to find an approach that
would work. He knew that his experience was stronger on the technical side of
things, and didn't realize that the far bigger challenges would lie in the coordination
and communication efforts.
The Opportunity
Over the next three months things went well for these three projects. Spencer,
Jennifer, and Mark all met regularly and ensured that any issues that arose were
dealt with to the satisfaction of everyone involved. In one of these conversations,
Spencer found out that a new project had just been spun up from the annuity
department. Even though this project was outside of the original plans, Spencer
thought it would be an easy conversation given the success he'd had with Jennifer
and Mark. He arranged for a meeting with the project manager, Ryan.
"Hi Ryan, Thanks for agreeing to meet with me. I'm the solution architect for the new
Customer service project. The auto insurance team and the home insurance team
are both leveraging it, and I thought it might be something you would be interested
in. By utilizing it, you'll be well-positioned for providing visibility into the other
products that annuity customers have."
Ryan replied, "I've heard a little bit about your effort, Spencer. Is it currently
in production?"
Spencer responded, "We're scheduled to go live on September 15th along with the
new home insurance system."
Ryan said, "Why don't you send some information about your service to my solution
architect, Ramesh?"
"I'll do that," said Spencer. Spencer had worked with Ramesh on a previous project,
so he decided to talk to him right away. Spencer walked down to Ramesh's desk,
"Hey Ramesh, I just met with your project manager, Ryan. I'm working on a new
Customer service project and I thought your annuity system could leverage it."
He went on to give Ramesh the details on the service that was being built, and how
it was providing an abstraction layer for the auto insurance and home insurance
customer databases, and positioning them for consolidation which would save the
company significant costs, in addition to allowing them to gain the visibility they
needed to start selling other products to existing customers.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 2
[ 27 ]
Ramesh said, "This looks really promising, but who's going to take care of putting
our database behind your abstraction layer?"
"Our efforts are nearly completed for the home and auto applications. My team has
some extra cycles available, and from what I understand, your database is reasonably
consistent with the home system, unlike some of the others."
"Well, if you're offering some free resources for the project, I'll at least take a look at
your service documentation and meet with Ryan."
Spencer said, "Great! Just let me know if there's anything you need."
A week went by, and Spencer had not heard anything back from Ramesh, so he went
to see him again. "Ramesh, did you get a chance to talk to Ryan?"
"Oh! Hi Spencer, sorry I didn't get back to you. I've been busy trying to keep things
on track. I did get a chance to talk to Ryan, but he was concerned about taking on the
additional scope of moving away from their existing database to the new service."
"Did you tell him that we'll take care of the work necessary within the service to add
your database?"
"Trust me, I did. After looking at your documentation, it really didn't look like it
would be much work at all for us to integrate in your new service, but he didn't
want to hear any of it. Not only was he concerned about the added scope, he also
said that he didn't want his project to be dependent on some other team. He said
he'd done that in the past, and it only led to delays, angry meetings, and some poor
performance reviews for everyone involved."
Spencer decided to go and speak directly to Ryan. While Ramesh indicated that
he had talked to Ryan, Spencer still wasn't sure whether he had done a good job
in hitting the key selling points for using the service. Spencer was very passionate
about SOA, and realized that not everyone shared that same passion. He caught up
with Ryan the next day.
"I spoke with Ramesh yesterday, and he said that you told him not to pursue
leveraging the service from my team. Is there something I can do that might change
your mind?"
"Spencer, I'm sorry, but I just can't take on any additional scope in this project. I
appreciate the offer, and the fact that your team was willing to take on the work
to integrate our database, but I've had too many bad experiences in the past with
creating dependencies on teams outside of my control."
"I really think this service would position you well for the future, since you know
that Advasco is really trying to improve our relationship with our customers.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Extending Project Governance for SOA
[ 28 ]
Jennifer and Mark are both in the same situation, and we've been able to deliver
everything they've needed without impacting their schedule. Would it help if you
talked to them?"
"I really don't have time for this Spencer. Jennifer and Mark were both mandated
to use this service thing that you're so excited about, and I know both of them were
pretty nervous about it. I am under no such mandate, and I'm not going to take on
any risk that I don't have to. Now, if you'll excuse me, I've got a project to manage."
Humbled, Spencer went back to his cube looking like a dog with its tail between
its legs. He was frustrated that even though the solution architect for the project
had reviewed the service documentation and told Ryan that it wouldn't impact on
the project, Ryan refused to budge. Not even the impact of the company's desire to
improve its relationship with its customers could change his mind.
Spencer went home that night and talked with his wife, Alexandra, about his day. "I
just don't understand why I couldn't convince Ryan to leverage the service. I tried to
remove every road block that I could think of, and he still just said 'No' without even
looking into the details."
Alexandra responded, "While I know you believe strongly in this, you really were
asking him to step outside of his comfort zone. Like he said, Jennifer and Mark didn't
have a choice. They were told up front that they had to use your service, so they
planned for it from the beginning. From my experience, a project manager's worst
nightmare is having dependencies that are outside of his control, and that's exactly
what you were asking him to do. I think most of the project managers I know would
have said 'No' as well. As much as this may have helped Advasco in the future,
I think you need to focus on ensuring that your efforts for Mark and Jennifer are
successful. Nothing breeds interest like success."
Spencer thought about what she said and agreed, "I can see your point. I shouldn't
think that the whole thing is going to fall apart just because of one project manager.
Mark and Jennifer have been very happy for the past two months after our
early problems."
The service development effort continued, and on September 8th, a week ahead of
schedule, the service went live along with Mark's application. Four weeks later, on
October 6th, Jennifer's application was added to the list.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 2
[ 29 ]
Beginning Your SOA Journey
Many organizations start their journey towards SOA through some sort of grass
roots effort. Unfortunately, these efforts normally result in what's known as JBOS
(Just a Bunch of Services). Typically, a project that had previously used some form
of distributed component technology, such as Enterprise Java Beans, has now chosen
to use XML or SOAP and HTTP, instead. The issue with this approach is that the
service boundary that establishes the consumer and provider relationship really
doesn't exist when one team is responsible for both the consumer and the provider.
Eventually, the organization will encounter a situation where the development of
the service and development of the consumer takes place in a separate project. This
could be due to there being more than one consumer, a B2B scenario where services
are developed for consumption by partner companies, a large program that involves
many independently managed projects, or simply a decision that the organization
makes as it learns more about SOA. In our example, this was exactly the case.
There was a program that encompassed three separate projects, two that involved
development of service consumers, and one that handled the service development.
The two consumers were the front-end for the auto insurance system and the
front-end for the home insurance system. Spencer's project was responsible for
creating a new service that provided an abstraction layer in front of the data systems
for both applications.
Key Project Roles
The nice thing about projects and programs is that they have an explicit hierarchy.
If a developer has a question or concern, they work with the project architect. The
project architect may take things to the project manager, and the project manager
may take things to the sponsor. If it's a program, then there's likely a hierarchy
of architects and project managers, but everything bubbles its way up to the
top. Everyone working on the project understands the objectives, the scope, the
milestones, and the deadlines. This explicit hierarchy is the first, and often only,
source of governance within the project. Within the project we have one piece of the
governance puzzle: people. The challenge, however, is that the people only have
authority within the project. If your SOA adoption efforts are broader than that
single project or program, you'll likely run into problems.
In our Advasco example, Spencer ran into exactly this problem. Initially, Spencer
only had to deal with project managers that were within the overall program. These
project managers knew that the desired outcome was a shared, accurate, complete
view of the customer, and it would be achieved through usage of the new service.
As a result, they worked together with Spencer to ensure that outcome would be
reached. When Spencer went outside of the program, however, his position of
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Extending Project Governance for SOA
[ 30 ]
authority did not go with him. When he met with Ryan, he had no perceived or
explicit authority. Even though the company had recognized a need to improve its
image with its customers, the scope of that effort within IT was limited to the home
and auto insurance areas. Therefore, for Ryan, service reuse was not on his list of
desired outcomes, and regardless of how good Spencer made it sound, it was not
something that he was willing to risk for the outcomes that he did desire.
The Service Contract
In this example, we clearly had a service provider, Spencer and his team, and two
service consumers, the auto insurance application whose development efforts were
managed by Jennifer and the home insurance application managed by Mark. A
key aspect of this example is that these three efforts were independently managed,
even though all being under a common program. A service should be independent
of all consumers and this begins at the time that version one is developed, not at
the time version one goes into production. In our example, imagine if the service
development was under the management of either Mark's project or Jennifer's
project. If a conflict arose, whose project would win out? Clearly, the project manager
that oversees the service development effort has the upper hand, and will likely
make decisions that will benefit their own project first. By separating out the service
development as an independently managed effort, both of the two consumers are
now equal, as they should be.
When we have the notion of a service consumer and a service provider, we need an
explicit representation of the relationship between them, and that relationship is a
service contract. This is no different than how we deal with services in the real world.
If you hire a crew to replace the roof on your home, the first step is for you and the
construction crew to sign a contract that governs the work. It provides governance
by establishing policies. These include the hours that work will take place, the time
in which the work will be done, the payment schedule and conditions, the behavior
of the crew in the event of bad weather, and so on. In the world of SOA, the service
contract is the collection of policies that govern the interaction between a service
consumer and a service provider. That contract states the messages that will be
exchanged, the URIs to be utilized, and more. We will continue to fill in details of the
service contract throughout the rest of the book.
In this chapter, the initial focus was on two factors: the functional interface and the
delivery schedule of the implementation. This is where most organizations start as
the functional interface and a working implementation of that interface are clearly
the minimum mandatory elements. It is no surprise that terminology like
contract-first quickly sprung up as the varying technical approaches started to
gain in popularity.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 2
[ 31 ]
This chapter also addressed another key element of service contracts. In the real
world, a contract is a binding agreement between two parties. Using our earlier
roofing example, if the contractor replaces the roof on your house as well as the roof
on your neighbor's house, he would have one contract with you and one contract
with your neighbor. While you and your neighbor are both receiving the same
service (a new roof) the terms and conditions around that service are likely to be
different. You may both have been presented a standard contract to begin with,
but from that point on, each one of you may have made your own adjustments or
additions. The same approach needs to hold true for technology services. You may
choose to expose a subset of operations to one consumer, while another consumer
may have access to all operations.
In our example, Spencer's efforts initially fell short. He had initial conversations with
Jennifer, but the only thing that came out of it was some agreement on when things
had to go live. There was no discussion of the service interface, no discussion of the
delivery schedule of milestone releases, or anything else. Given that this service was
only going to be consumed internally, the development of the interface should have
been a joint effort of both the consumer and provider. Spencer's team would bring
domain knowledge from the provider's side, Jennifer's team would bring domain
knowledge from the consumer's side, and together they would establish a service
interface that was amenable to both. Instead, Spencer's team developed the initial
service interface in a vacuum, creating something that may have met their needs, but
did not meet the needs of the consumer. Meeting the needs of the consumer is the
most important aspect of providing a service.
The second mistake that Spencer made was that he did not establish a formal
definition of the handoffs that would be required between his team and Jennifer's
team. In providing Jennifer's team an endpoint that could be used during
development, he thought he was doing the right thing, but then when that endpoint
changed out from underneath them, since, after all, it was under development, it had
an impact on the trust between Jennifer's team and his team.
This particular situation can be a challenging one for many organizations, because
the basic design of their environments often assumes that everything required for
a project is under the control of the project team, and can therefore be promoted
through the environments in lock-step. Now, when service consumers and the
service provider are being developed according to their own timelines, instability
can be introduced.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Extending Project Governance for SOA
[ 32 ]
The appropriate way to handle this situation is to make explicit those policies that
govern the interaction between the service consumers and the service provider
during the design and development phase, rather than dealing with situations that
arise on an ad hoc basis. The service provider has the responsibility for delivering a
stable version of the service at various points throughout the project, and deploying
it onto a stable platform that only changes according to the policies within the
contracts enacted with the consumer teams.
For example, suppose both the service consumer and service provider are taking an
iterative approach to the development of their solutions. In order to allow the service
consumer adequate time for testing and feedback, the service provider may only
promote a subset of their iteration builds to an integration environment for use by
the service consumer. The service consumer would be required to provide feedback
within a specified amount of time in order to have the fix included in a subsequent
integration release. This is shown in the following figure:
Iteration
One
Iteration
One
Iteration
Two
Iteration
Two
Iteration
Three
Iteration
Three
Iteration
Four
Iteration
Four
Iteration
Five
Iteration
Five
Iteration
Six
Iteration
Six
Integration
Testing
Integration
Testing
Integration
Testing
Service Contract
Integration
Release One
Integration
Release Two
Integration
Release Three
Testing
Feedback
Testing
Feedback
Service
Consumer
Service
Provider
In short, within a single project, iterative, agile development can certainly take
precedence. Across projects, however, the handoffs should be formalized and
explicitly specified as part of the service contract, especially when two or more
consumers are involved.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 2
[ 33 ]
Adding SOA to Traditional Project Governance
While the big change for the organization is learning how to manage the
consumer-provider relationship, we can't forget about traditional project governance.
Today, your organization may make use of architecture reviews, design reviews,
code reviews, and operational readiness reviews as part of the software development
process. These reviews already embody the three components of governance: people,
policies, and process. These reviews more than likely involve resources from outside
the project that the enterprise has positioned as authorities. An architecture review
may involve enterprise architects, more senior architects, or other architectural peers.
A design review may involve architects or senior developers. A code review may
involve senior developer or other development peers. The operational readiness
review probably involves members of the operational areas to ensure that a handoff
to the support teams will be successful.
In order for these reviews to be successful, the policies that need to be followed
for architecture, design, coding, and deployment need to be known to the project
team. In the absence of documented policies that encourage the desired behavior,
these reviews tend to be a show of power by the review team, where it is simply an
exercise in trying to find something about the project to make the statement that they
know better than the project team. Meanwhile, the project team plays a guessing
game trying to determine what the review team wants to see, usually winding up
wrong. In short, without documented policies, the review tends to be a lose-lose
situation for all involved.
The process is the part that can vary. Some organizations choose to utilize a formal
review process where an hour or two of time is scheduled with the reviewing body,
the team prepares a formal presentation, and the review takes place. However, it
doesn't need to be this heavyweight. Any of these reviews could also be done in a
more informal manner, with a single meeting between a recognized authority for
the review being done and the project architect or technical lead. If there is a formal
technical hierarchy in the organization, the process may simply be part of the normal
conversation that a project architect has with their architecture manager on a regular
basis. Finally, an organization can even choose to have no review process, and
simply trust that the decision makers on the project have awareness of the policies
that must be followed.
So how does SOA change the current governance model for projects? Presuming
your existing governance model is working, the only thing that SOA introduces
is additional policies. If your existing governance model isn't working, which is a
subject for another book, consider making a change.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Extending Project Governance for SOA
[ 34 ]
You now have a project that is building a new artifact, the service. While we
discussed the importance of involving potential consumers in the definition of the
service interface, the enterprise also has a role. Policies that are normally enforced by
an external review board are typically associated with ensuring consistency across
projects. When building services, the areas for consistency are:
The technologies used for the service implementation
The technologies used for communication between the consumer and
the provider
The representation of the information that is transferred between the
consumers and the provider
Service Implementation Technologies
The first area that an enterprise may strive for consistency is in the technologies
used to build services, also known as service platform technologies. There's a good
chance that an organization may already have some standardization in this area,
such as a single Java EE application server. Even if they do, there is still room
for standardization.
At a minimum, the organization will need a general purpose application server
and an associated development framework, such as a Java EE application server or
Windows Server and the Microsoft .NET framework. Both of these platforms provide
libraries for many different types of service communication technologies, as well
as a robust library of open-source frameworks either as alternative or as extensions
for other purposes. Depending on your organization, you may have one or many
of these platforms. A general principle that organizations try to use is to not have
two tools for the same job. That being said, if an organization has a federated IT
department, whether due to past acquisitions, geographic needs, or other reasons,
each of these separate IT groups may have their own standards.
In addition to the general purpose application server, another common service
platform is the automated process platform, frequently associated with the use of
BPEL technologies. This is a new breed of development platform tailored towards
the orchestration of other services. Typically, it involves a graphical modeler,
providing a drag-and-drop metaphor for connecting services in an orchestrated
sequence, such as shown in the following figure:
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 2
[ 35 ]
Service A Service C Service E
Service B
Service D
Yes
No
Timed SubProcess
End
Decision
Wait
Depending on the product chosen, it may include some out-of-the-box adapters
for doing common activities, such as retrieving records from a relational
database, publishing messages to an enterprise messaging systems, or sending
an email message.
The recommended approach for determining the appropriate number of service
platforms is to first determine the service types that an organization may need to
provide. A service type is a class of service with a specific set of capabilities that
may lend itself to specific technologies. Common types for which you may consider
having specific platforms include:
Composite services
Automated (Orchestrated) processes
Integration services
Presentation services
Management services
Information services
Content subscription services
General business services
Composite services are, as the name implies, services that are built from other
services. This typically involves combining the output of several services and
combining it to be delivered to a consumer through a single service.
Automated processes, as was discussed earlier, are about the orchestration of a
collection of services to perform a higher level function. Frequently, composite
services can be thought of as a subset of the overall space of automated processes.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Extending Project Governance for SOA
[ 36 ]
Integration services are services that are geared towards communication with
third-party systems, such as SAP and Oracle. These are frequently associated
with Enterprise Application Integration, or EAI, technologies. While EAI, as a
category, has lost favor, there is still plenty of need for integration technologies in
communicating with these complex application platforms.
Presentation services are services that provide user interface functionality, whether
simply content in a presentation-friendly format, or fully featured presentation
components suitable for composition in a portal context.
Management services are services that are geared towards the management of IT
systems, typically leveraging technologies like SNMP (Simple Network Management
Protocol) and JMX (Java Management Extensions) for communication.
Information services are services that are intended for data access and manipulation.
These are typically marketed as Data Service Platforms or Enterprise Information
Integration products.
Content subscription services, such as news feeds, are intended to provide content
to consumers on a subscription basis using technologies such as RSS (Really Simple
Syndication) and Atom.
General business services is the final service type, and is intended to be the catch-all
for other services that don't cleanly fit into any of the previous categories. These would
normally be implemented using a general purpose application server platform.
Service Communication Technologies
The next set of technologies that an organization may standardize on is service
communication technologies. While much has been written on how adopting web
services is not the same as adopting SOA, one or more technologies must still be
chosen for service communication. This may vary by the service type involved.
While in the past, organizations may have leveraged distributed component
technologies such as CORBA or Enterprise Java Beans, today most organizations
are leveraging either Web Services technologies, some less-restrictive form rooted in
XML and HTTP (also known as POX—Plain Old XML), or REST.
In the past, a very important aspect of choosing a communication technology
was interoperability. Most distributed communication technologies were
platform-specific, focused on communication within a platform rather than across
platforms. This posed a significant problem when an enterprise had multiple
platforms in the environment, which today is the norm for any large organization.
This is a challenge that is still being fought today, with each technology getting
closer and closer to achieving out-of-the-box interoperability in a very
heterogeneous environment.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 2
[ 37 ]
WS-I Compliance
In the case of web services, there is an industry organization whose specific charter
is to establish best practices for WS-I (Web Services Interoperability). As of 2008,
there are well over 60 specifications that are related to web services, so determining
the right way for using each of them can be a challenging exercise. WS-I has defined
a series of profiles (starting with the Basic Profile) that provide best practices for how
to use various subsets of the web services specifications. As a best practice on its
own, if you choose to leverage web services technologies as part of your technology
portfolio for SOA adoption, you should ensure that all platforms involved are
compliant with the WS-I Basic Profile.
Security Credentials
Another factor that must be considered when choosing service communication
technologies is security. At the time of writing, security is still a large differentiator
between some of the popular approaches today, and also a source of potential
interoperability problems, even when there are no functional interoperability issues.
For example, within web services, the WS-Security specification defines a framework
for placing security tokens within a SOAP message. Building on that framework,
there are now several standard profiles for common security tokens, including a
basic username and password combination, X.509 certificates, SAML (Security
Assertion Markup Language) assertions, and Kerberos tickets. So, while two parties
may both support web services, if a provider decides to only accept security tokens
via the Kerberos profile, while the consumer is only capable of sending SAML
assertions, we still may have interoperability issues.
Overall, organizations are in a far better state with the options available to them now
than ten years ago. While there are still interoperability challenges, most of them can
be overcome through a variety of means. The role of governance in this is to ensure
that communication technologies are used consistently and appropriately, not to
ensure that the organization only chooses one communication technology.
Service Interface Specification
Perhaps the most important aspect of enterprise governance on service technologies
is in the interface specification. Regardless of whether an organization leverages
web services, REST, XML over HTTP, Enterprise Java Beans, or virtually any
other communication technology, information needs to be transferred between a
service consumer and a service provider. While choosing a single communication
technology can resolve interoperability problems when transferring information
between a single consumer and single provider, there is still risk for inconsistency in
the information when a service consumer talks with multiple service providers.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Extending Project Governance for SOA
[ 38 ]
In our example, Spencer had the challenge of providing a Customer service that met
the needs of both the auto insurance system and the home insurance system. This
proved to be a challenge because each of these systems had their own definition
of what a Customer is. In designing the original interface, Spencer's team focused
inward, basing their decisions on the service development team's understanding of
the service implementation. The path of least resistance for this team was to simply
base the service interface on that knowledge, working with people within their own
project. In other words, the implementation model of the information bubbled its
way out to the service interface as shown in the following figure:
Interface Model
Service
Implementation
Implementation
Model
Information Store
Storage Model
This is a bottom-up approach, where the representation of the information begins
with how it is stored in the information store (for example, relational database)
and is expressed in a storage model. The information is used within the service
implementation in some form, that representation is known as the implementation
model. Finally, that information is exposed via the service interface, as the interface
model. The challenge that is faced is that the easiest path for a development team is
to simply let these models bubble up. It took many years for the industry to realize
that a model that was well-suited for storing information (for example, a relational
data model) may not be well-suited for processing information, and thus a new
model was needed (for example, an object model). Likewise, it is also true that the
implementation model is not well-suited for transmitting information to another
processing node, because their processing needs (and possibly their platform for
implementation) is going to be different.
An alternative approach is to take a very consumer-oriented view. Instead of
allowing the internal service implementation to drive the interface model, the
model is determined through analysis of the service consumers, as shown in the
following figure:
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 2
[ 39 ]
Interface Model
Service Consumer
Consumer
Implementation
Model
Service
Implementation
At first glance, this may seem like the more service-oriented way of approaching the
interface design, since after all, services are about consumption. Unfortunately, not
all consumers are created equal. In our example, Spencer had a challenge in meeting
the needs of both Mark's team and Jennifer's team because each of them had their
own model, and there were inconsistencies between them.
An approach that Spencer could have taken would have been to have his team meet
with Mark's team and Jennifer's team to balance each of their respective interests in
coming up with a service interface in which all parties agree. While this may have
prevented some of Spencer's problems, it still is not without its challenges. Suppose
that a few months later, Advasco chooses to partner with a new company for billing
services. Clearly, these billing services need Customer information, but it is likely
that the new company has their own definition of what a Customer is. So, the
situation we now have is shown in the following figure:
Interface Model
Customer B
Service Consumer 1 Service Consumer 2
Consumer 1
Implementation
Model
Consumer 2
Implementation
Model
Interface Model
Customer A
Service A
Implementation
Service B
Implementation
Customer Model
A
Customer Model
B
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Extending Project Governance for SOA
[ 40 ]
In this situation, we have two service consumers, 1 and 2, and two service providers,
A and B. Both services A and B require some representation of Customer information
as part of their service interface. Unfortunately, if these representations are
inconsistent, the burden of transforming and mapping between them fall back to
each individual consumer. Every consumer that needs to use both services A and B
winds up having to implement that transformation and mapping within their own
code. As the number of services that a particular consumer interacts with grows, the
situation gets more and more complicated.
Using a Canonical Model
The approach to solving this dilemma is to embrace the notion of a canonical model.
A canonical model is an information model that is independent from any particular
service consumer or service provider. When adopting a canonical model, service
interfaces are defined according to it. In this way, a consumer or a provider only
needs to know how to map to the canonical model, rather than having to know how
to map to any of the possible interface models of the independent service providers.
The picture now looks like this:
Service Consumer 1
Consumer 1
Implementation
Model
Map
Canonical Model
Map
Canonical Model
Customer Model
A
Service A
Implementation
Map
Canonical Model
Customer Model
B
Service B
Implementation
Service Consumer 2
Consumer 2
Implementation
Model
Map
Canonical Model
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 2
[ 41 ]
The hidden challenge behind this approach is the actual development of the
canonical model itself. Performing an analysis of all possible consumers and all
possible providers that deal with a particular piece of information, and then trying
to find common ground across all of them can be a painful and time-consuming
exercise. Many organizations choose to avoid this altogether and base their canonical
model on an industry standard for their line of business. In some cases, this is exactly
the right thing to do, especially if the services being designed are going to be
exposed externally.
While the construction of a canonical model is beyond the scope of this book,
there is no doubt that there is a need for an information model independent of any
consumer or provider that establishes policies for message interfaces. In the absence
of such a model, the path of least resistance is to push the implementation models
of individual consumers or provider out into service interfaces, which leads to a far
worse situation of point-to-point integrations, and many-to-many mappings between
them, contained within each service consumer. At the same time, if the development
of an enterprise model is a painful and time-consuming process that frequently ends
in failure, what is an organization to do?
To establish some best practices, we must remember that the goal of governance here
is to ensure consistency among service interface definitions, not to ensure that the
enterprise creates a canonical model. Consistency can be achieved following these
best practices:
Consult all potential service consumers: In our example, Spencer eventually
consulted the two consumers that were associated with his program, but as
we found out later in the chapter, there were other potential customers, such
as Ryan, as well. Some human judgment is always needed, as a project can
quickly get into analysis paralysis.
Consult service owners that also use similar information: In addition to
consulting potential service consumers, you should also contact other service
providers that may also utilize the same information. With good use of a
registry or repository tool, other service providers should be easily found.
In the absence of an existing standard, leverage an industry standard if
one exists: Many times, groups with vested interests have a difficult time
reaching consensus and as a result, they bring in a professional mediator.
In the case of service interfaces, an industry standard can act as the external
mediator, providing a model that is independent of any of the models at
hand, yet having the backing of an industry coalition that focuses in the
particular domain at hand.
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Extending Project Governance for SOA
[ 42 ]
If the services are going to be exposed externally, leverage an industry
standard if one exists: It is difficult enough to get internal groups to agree on
messaging standards, doing so with other organizations can be even more of
a challenge. If an organization pushes its own model on its partners, it can be
perceived as domineering. It also runs the risk of alienating partners if other
competitors offer similar services based on standards. If a standard exists,
it should be leveraged. If one doesn't exist, an organization should think
carefully about driving a process to establish one rather than trying to make
their own model the de facto standard.
Define your plan for change: Regardless of how many potential consumers
and providers are consulted, it is likely that, at some point in the future,
your interface will change. Rather than starting with the assumption that
your interface will be defined once and never be modified, start with the
assumption that it will change, and walk through the steps necessary to
ensure that the change happens in a smoothly managed fashion. Decide
how existing consumers will be notified, how long previous versions will be
supported, and at what timeframes the new interfaces will get rolled out. We
discussed how the service contract needs to explicitly specify the interactions
between service consumer and service provider during service development,
but it must also specify the interactions that will occur after the development
of the initial version, including the development of subsequent versions.
Web Services, POX over HTTP, and REST
Any conversation about service interface technologies would not be complete
without a discussion about the differences between the three most popular interface
technologies today, which are web services, POX over HTTP, and REST. We've
mentioned web services quite a bit in this chapter, so let's begin there. Web services
provide the most explicit service interface of the three approaches, through the use of
a WSDL (Web Services Description Language) file. The WSDL file describes how to
interact with a service by specifying the URLs to which messages should be directed,
as well as schemas for the messages themselves, using XML Schema. A service is
comprised of one or more operations, and each operation can specify messages
associated with its usage including a request message, a response message, and fault
messages. At least from a functional perspective, the message formats are very explicit.
POX over HTTP is more of a descriptor than it is a standard. In short, it leverages
HTTP with XML messages as the payload on requests and responses, but there are
no explicit interface definitions whatsoever. Consumers are completely reliant on
word of mouth or published documentation to determine what the allowed XML
messages are. It can be thought of as web services without the WSDL, SOAP, and
WS-*. It is certainly very common to find it used in AJAX applications where a web
browser uses JavaScript to send and receive XML messages with a back-end system.
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 2
[ 43 ]
REST, which many people mistakenly confuse with POX, stands for
Representational State Transfer, and is based on the work of Dr. Roy Fielding.
REST views the world not as a collection of services, but rather a collection of
resources. Each resource is uniquely addressable via a URI, and all resources can
be interacted with according to a universal interface. When using it with HTTP, the
universal interface is generally accepted as the HTTP operation of POST, GET, PUT,
and DELETE. When using REST, a query for information would always be done
via a HTTP GET operation, while when using POX over HTTP, it may be tunneled
through HTTP POST, and when using Web Services, it is most certainly tunneled
through HTTP POST. The key difference for this discussion, however, is that REST
does not make the information model explicitly known at design time via the use of
an interface specification, like a WSDL file.
Between these three approaches, the single biggest differentiator from the point
of view of interface technologies is the use of an explicit interface definition that
includes an information model with Web Services and the distinct absence of one
for either POX or REST. The one common truth, however, is that all three of these
technologies can be used to share information between systems. If the information
being shared is done so using different representations, it places more complexity
with the consumer to deal with those inconsistencies. Regardless of whether the
information model is explicitly specified or not, there is still a role for governance in
ensuring that appropriate consistency is maintained and the associated complexity in
maintaining that consistency is appropriately managed.
Summary
In this chapter, we walked through a simple example of a company's initial SOA
efforts. We saw how project and program structure establishes a recognized set of
authorities within the project or program, but how that authority does not go beyond
the project or program. We saw how working across project boundaries, even when
under a common program, can be challenging when the required interactions are
not made explicit. We saw the challenge that a service provider faces when trying
to establish an interface that meets the needs of multiple consumers, both from a
functional standpoint as well as a scheduling standpoint.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Extending Project Governance for SOA
[ 44 ]
Beyond project governance, the role of enterprise governance was introduced
and how the desired behavior for the organization is consistency. While a single
standard is one way of achieving consistency, it is not the only way, nor may it be
the right way, depending on the structure of your organization. Adopting SOA
does not establish the need for enterprise governance; it simply inserts new policies
into the mix of things that must be governed. The three key policy areas are service
implementation technologies, which are the platforms and frameworks used to build
services, service communication technologies, which are the technologies used to
allow communication between service consumers and service providers, and service
interface technologies, which are the information models that are used within service
messages. Of these three, service interface technologies pose the most challenging
problem, as inconsistent information models create point-to-point integration
scenarios and increase the amount of complexity in service consumers. Adopting a
canonical information model, or allowing one to grow organically, can manage this
complexity effectively.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Avoiding a Bunch of Services
How does an organization move from simply creating services that have value
within a single project to services that have value within the enterprise? If they don't,
they won't have a SOA; they'll simply have a bunch of services. This chapter will
demonstrate the steps that Advasco took to avoid that situation.
Undirected Service Creation
By the start of the year, the successes of the new Customer Information Service
were beginning to roll in. The field agents that were using the new auto and home
insurance applications were very pleased that they now could easily see which
customers held multiple policies, and which ones did not. In turn, the customers
were more satisfied that they were being presented with possible discounts without
having to ask, and the customers that held both auto and home insurance policies
were treated with the appropriate respect due a repeat customer.
Andrea, the CIO, called Elena into her office, "Elena, I wanted to thank you for your
team's work on the effort associated with the auto and home insurance applications.
While I know it's still early, the feedback we've received from the field agents has
been great."
Elena replied, "Thank you very much. I know Spencer and the project team put a
lot of hard work into the effort. Spencer has been looking for opportunities to apply
some of what he has learned about SOA, and it's great that his initial effort has been
a success so far."
"You know, I've also been hearing from colleagues that they're looking to embrace
SOA as well. In my next Town Hall, I'm definitely going to give some praise to the
efforts and encourage others to incorporate SOA into their projects."
"I'm sure Spencer will be happy to hear that. Let me know if there's anything you
need from me or my team in preparation for it."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Avoiding a Bunch of Services
[ 46 ]
"I'll do that. Once again, thanks for the excellent work. I'll be sure to stop by and see
Spencer and his team and thank them for their effort directly."
Andrea did exactly that, and Spencer appreciated the gesture. He came home that
night and told Alexandra about the result. "The CIO personally came by today to
thank me for my efforts on the new Customer Information Service. She was very
excited about the results and told me she's going to include SOA adoption as part of
her message to all of IT in her next Town Hall."
"That's great news," said Alexandra, "I know you've really been putting in a lot of
time to learn about SOA and it's great that all of your hard work will pay off."
At the next IT Town Hall, Andrea was true to her word. After giving her review
of recent projects, which did include the updates to the auto and home insurance
systems, but surprisingly made no mention of the new customer service, Andrea
spoke about some of the new and emerging topics in technology that she felt were
important to the future success of IT. In these topics, she included SOA. With this
one, she said, "We've had some initial success with SOA, and I believe that we can
have more. I encourage all of you to leverage it on your projects."
Afterwards, Spencer was walking back to his cubicle with Elena, discussing the talk.
"It was great that Andrea mentioned SOA. Hopefully, we'll start building on the
progress that's been made so far."
Elena replied, "Yes, it never hurts to have the CIO mention something you're
interested in seeing applied."
Over the next few months, just as Andrea had recommended, several projects did
exactly that, and tried to embrace services. Much to the surprise of Andrea, Elena,
and Spencer, however, the success stories were not flowing freely. In fact, it seemed
that the tap was completely shut off.
Effort One: Hot Potato
One of the first efforts that had a lot of promise was a set of three different projects
that had all identified a common need for an address validation service. One was
a project associated with account maintenance, one was a system that was going
to pre-qualify applicants for insurance, and the final one was for the facilities
organization that dealt with all of the real estate associated with their branch offices.
The first project to get underway was for the account maintenance area. Maria was
the project manager for this effort, and she was having lunch with a few of the other
project managers. They were talking about their latest assignments, and Maria
mentioned that she was now working on the account maintenance project and that
her technical lead recommended that they try to leverage SOA. One of the services
they thought they needed was for customer address validation.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 3
[ 47 ]
One of the other project managers, Beth, said, "You know, I'm working on the
facilities management project and I think we're going to need something that will do
that as well."
Another project manager, Jim, also said, "Hey, I think my project could use that
service, too." They agreed to get together back at work and discuss their joint needs.
At that meeting, the conversation began with Jim and Beth both asking Maria, "So
when can you deliver that service to us?"
Maria responded, "When was the decision made that my project would deliver this?
Jim, your project is the one that will likely be taking in the most new addresses,
shouldn't your project be the one to handle this? Do you think my project will
deliver this?"
Jim said, "But my project has to be in place by July 15th. My users will throw a fit if
we don't deliver by then. I can't afford to add time in my schedule to accommodate
the needs of your projects."
At this point, Beth began to get a bit frustrated, "Look, I don't care which one of your
projects provides the service, but if you expect me to use it, I have to have something
to start coding against within two weeks."
Unfortunately, nothing was resolved at this meeting. In fact, the teams continued
each on their own way until Elena met with each of the solution architects and
found out that no agreement was ever reached on who would develop the service.
Elena gathered the three project managers from these projects, along with Spencer,
for a meeting and put down an ultimatum. "I recently met with all three of the
solution architects responsible for your projects and it is my understanding that
even though they all agree that sharing a single address validation service would
be the best course, they're presently all on a course to build their own. That's simply
unacceptable. There's no good reason for all of these projects to be expending the
effort to build their own implementation. From what I learned, the sole reason
that this happened is that you couldn't agree on who would take responsibility for
building it."
Immediately, Beth jumped in, "I told both of them that it didn't matter to me which
one of them wrote the service, I just needed something right away. As a result, I had
to have my developers start working on it if I wanted to meet my dates."
Jim countered, "Beth, if you needed something so quickly, why didn't you volunteer
to write the service and let us use it?"
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Avoiding a Bunch of Services
[ 48 ]
Elena knew she needed to pacify the situation, "We're not here to dwell on how we
got to this place. We're here to figure out how to get back on the right path. That
path is the creation of a single service that all three of your projects will use. Spencer,
you've got the most knowledge around SOA of anyone here. Do you have any
recommendations?"
Spencer said, "Actually I do. One of the reasons for building services is to define
boundaries where things can change independently. One of the ways to determine
which team should have ownership over the service is to figure out which
application space, over time, is the most likely to be the source of change. If the other
applications are merely along for the ride, then it probably doesn't make much sense
for them to take ownership of the service. Maria, doesn't your team monitor the
postal regulations?"
Maria replied, "Yes, we do, and they change almost every year."
Spencer then said, "Jim, how does your team normally handle these changes?"
Jim hesitantly replied, "Well, we normally don't, and when we encounter a question
about them, we usually go talk to someone in Maria's area."
As he watched the realization sink in, Spencer said, "Do you see my point? It's most
likely that Maria's area is going to be the one that would be tracking the changes that
would result in a change to the service."
Maria responded, "I see your point. In addition to the postal regulations, my
organization is responsible for all of the non-position related account information.
We handle all of the address change notifications, and deal with returned mail. I'm
pretty sure that if anything ever needed to change about address verification, my
group would be the first one to know."
Beth and Jim agreed. They both indicated that they really only cared about whether
an address was valid or not.
Spencer said, "Well, it looks like we have a winner."
Elena told Maria to immediately work with Beth and Jim to come up with a
service interface that worked for all, and get back on the path of having a single
implementation. The managers from the organizations weren't very happy about the
schedule impact that all of the projects took as a result, but they knew that Andrea
had made SOA a goal, and as a result, they went along with the changes.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 3
[ 49 ]
Effort Two: What Customer Service?
The next project that didn't go as expected was an application from the brokerage
business. This application was a new portfolio management system, allowing both
financial consultant and customer to have access to portfolio management and
proposal capabilities. As part of the design of this solution, the team determined that
one of the services they needed was a Customer Information Service.
Unfortunately, this team had no knowledge whatsoever of the Customer Information
Service that had already been built by Spencer's team. As a result, they went ahead
and developed their own Customer Information Service, rather than leveraging the
work that had already been performed previously.
As part of the operational readiness review, Elena looked over the operational
support manual, and noticed that the document made reference to a Customer
Information Service. She assumed it was the same one that Spencer's team had
created. She saw Spencer in the hallway and said, "Hey Spencer, I see that your
Customer Information Service has another customer from the financial services area."
Spencer replied, "What? That's the first I've ever heard about anything from the
financial services area. Are you sure?"
Elena said, "I was just reviewing an operational readiness document from them and
I saw a reference to a Customer Information Service, and I assumed it was yours. I'd
better go take a deeper look."
Elena returned to her desk and read more into the document and had her fears
validated. The project had created a new Customer Information Service. She went
and found the project architect and asked him, "Why did you create a brand new
Customer Information Service? Didn't you know that we already had one that was
built by Spencer and his team for the auto and home insurance lines? I'm sure he
could have easily extended it to support your needs."
The architect replied, "I had no idea that there already was a Customer Information
Service. I normally don't have any interaction with the insurance areas, so I don't
know how I would have found out about it. I would have been happy to leverage it.
I thought we were doing the right thing by breaking out this service and building it."
Elena was now beginning to see that this SOA journey was not going to be an
easy one.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Avoiding a Bunch of Services
[ 50 ]
Effort Three: Where Did They Go?
Finally, back in the insurance department where the SOA effort initially began,
the home insurance team was in need of a service that would validate whether the
company was allowed to sell certain products in a particular state. Advasco was
continually trying to expand operations, so the answer to this question changed
on a frequent basis. The team was aware that the auto insurance team had recently
completed a similar service and thought that it could be extended for their needs.
Adil, the manager of the home insurance systems, went to meet with Tim, the auto
insurance manager whom he had worked with on the new Customer Information
Service. He said, "Hey Tim, I heard that one of your teams recently built a service
for state sales verification. We'd like to do the same, and I wanted to see if your
team could extend the service to include the rules and regulations around the home
insurance products. I'm sure it already has the necessary checks for sales offices."
Tim replied, "Yes, we built a service for that with our last update. Mitch was the
project manager for that effort, why don't you talk to him and see what he can do."
Adil sent Mitch an email asking about the service, but wasn't happy with
Mitch's response:
Adil, yes, I was the project manager for the last update that created that service.
I've moved on to a different effort, now, however, as have the developers that
worked on the project. I'm not sure whom you would even talk to about having
modifications made. Sorry, I couldn't be of more help—Mitch.
Adil went back to see Tim, "Tim, I just received an email from Mitch, and he
indicated that the team that built the service has been disbanded and are all working
on other things now."
"Hmm, I hadn't thought about that, but we normally do just assign resources to the
next project in the queue."
"Any suggestions? I could really use this service, but I certainly can't wait until the
developers are freed up to make the necessary changes."
"Is this something some of your developers could take care of?"
"Unfortunately, most of the work for this system was going to be on the frontend, so almost all of my developers assigned to it are C# programmers. Early on,
the architect for the project made the assumption that we'd be able to leverage
your service, so I only assigned one Java developer to the effort for some minor
modifications on the back-end. I'm guessing your service is written in Java, right?"
"Yes, it was written in Java", Tim replied.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 3
[ 51 ]
Adil's team was in a bind. His Java developer was a junior developer whom he didn't
think could come up to speed on someone else's service quick enough, and Tim
didn't have anyone available to make the necessary modifications. Both managers
wanted to do the right thing. They contacted Elena for direction. After meeting
with Elena, and going over the priorities associated with Adil's project and the auto
insurance project that the original service developers were now involved with, the
decision was made to delay the auto insurance project to free up the developers
necessary to make the modifications to the service. Both efforts wound up being
delivered far later than the original target dates for the system.
The SOA Center of Excellence
Elena called her team together to discuss the situation. "We all know that Andrea
encouraged IT to adopt SOA in her Town Hall meeting last spring. Since that
time, we've had two efforts that had significant delivery delays that were directly
attributable to their attempts to adopt SOA. One effort had three different projects
that all needed a common service, but no one wanted to step up and write it.
They spent all their time arguing, and almost wound up with three separate
implementations of the same thing until I stepped in to get them on the same page.
Another effort from the financial services area wound up writing another Customer
Information Service, when the existing one from Spencer's team could have met at
least 90% of their requirements. Finally, on the last effort, the manager tried to do
the right thing in reusing an existing service, but there were no developers left from
the original service development project to make the necessary modifications. I don't
know about you, but if I were Andrea, I'm not going to be too happy about our SOA
results for the year."
One of the architects, Greg, was sitting in his chair with a frown on his face. "Elena,
I know that SOA is important to Andrea, but I don't see how we could have done
anything differently on any of these efforts. At least the teams were all trying to write
services, isn't that a good thing?"
Spencer responded, "Greg, while I do think it's good that these projects are trying
to write services, we're going to have a big problem if we keep seeing delays or
redundant services. Also, keep in mind that these are only the projects that we've
heard about. Who knows how many other projects are having similar problems?"
Elena said, "I agree. So, what are we going to do about it?"
Spencer replied, "While I don't want to just use the easy target that we always
hear about in IT, it's definitely true that if our communication was better we could
have easily avoided having the financial services team write a separate Customer
Information Service. They simply didn't know about the services that already
existed. If someone had made sure they knew, they probably would have used it."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Avoiding a Bunch of Services
[ 52 ]
Greg replied, "That's true for that situation, but what about the other two? Those
teams were communicating with each other and they still ran into problems."
Spencer thought about this one, because Greg had a good point. The teams involved
with these projects were talking to each other, but they all still had problems. Then
it hit him. "You're right Greg, they were communicating. What they didn't have,
however, was service ownership. All of the projects involved were concerned with
their own needs. Those needs were not writing a service that could be used by
others. Those needs were the typical needs of all of our projects, which is writing
the consumers of those services, usually the user facing systems that the end users
see. In the case of the address validation service, Elena had to force one of the teams
to take ownership of the service and deliver it to the other teams. With the state
sales verification service, Adil and Tim agreed on who owned the service, but the
organization didn't back it up with any staff. Even on my own efforts back with the
Customer Information Service, our initial focus was so much on what we had to do,
and not on delivering the service to the consumers."
Elena stepped in and said, "Spencer, that's a very good analysis of the problem and I
think I have an idea. You're absolutely right that service ownership is a new concept.
So is looking for services that have already been developed when architecting a new
project. This is a fundamental change in the way we do development. Change like
this is never easy. Everything I've read about change recommends starting small,
getting some experience under your belt, and then leveraging that experience in
other areas. In order to do this, I think we need to establish a Center of Excellence
for SOA."
Over the next two weeks, Elena met with several managers that had been involved
with projects that were embracing SOA, and put together a team of eight people,
including Spencer. The team was a mixture of architects, technical leaders, and lead
analysts. Elena and three key senior managers were the sponsors of the team.
"I want to thank you all for agreeing to take on this added responsibility. Your
respective managers all thought that you have a good handle on the concepts around
SOA. That's very important, because your job as a team is to make sure our SOA
efforts stay on track."
Jared, one of the lead analysts from the brokerage services group, asked, "I'm more
than happy to help out with this effort, but I have a simple question. What do we
want to do with SOA? While I understand that Andrea has encouraged us to adopt
SOA, there really isn't any consensus within my area on what exactly we should
be doing. Some teams think that unless something is clearly going to be reused,
they don't need to do anything. Other teams think that if you're not coming out of a
project with at least 10 services, you're not doing a good job."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 3
[ 53 ]
Raj, one of the technical leaders agreed, "I've seen the same thing in my area. It
ranges from some teams that are completely ignoring SOA because they don't think
it applies to them, to teams that are trying to take all of their current integration
points and expose them using SOAP and HTTP."
"Well, it sounds like the first task for this group is to provide some definition around
what SOA means at Advasco and start getting the message out," said Elena. "At
the same time, remember that we still have projects going on every single day and
they're not going to stop while this team takes the time to define SOA. So, in addition
to defining SOA, all of you need to be the ambassadors for your areas. You need
to be aware of the SOA efforts that are occurring within your areas, and you need
to share those efforts with this team. If you become aware of service development
from another area that is applicable to your own area, start the conversation and
get the right people talking to each other. If you find out that a team in your area is
not taking the appropriate steps with SOA, whether it is reusing existing services or
taking the time to find out which other teams may be able to leverage their services,
you have full authority to stop that project and get them on the right track. I've
spoken to all of the development managers in all of your areas, and they're all on
board with this effort."
"What about the problems we've had with service ownership?" asked Spencer. "I
don't feel comfortable telling these teams which one of them should be writing the
service. Based upon the few examples we've had so far, sometimes there isn't a
clear answer."
"Good question Spencer. I don't expect this group to make ownership decisions.
Some of those decisions may challenge our current organizational structures. It is
best that we allow the managers in those organizations to make those decisions.
That being said, it is the responsibility of this group to escalate these situations
immediately so that we can get the managers involved before it becomes a problem.
So, does anyone else have any questions? If not, let's go to work and start getting the
SOA efforts on track."
In line with Elena's direction, the first thing the Center of Excellence team did
was to focus on defining what SOA was for Advasco, and figuring out how to
communicate that message to the rest of the organization. They put together a series
of presentations that explained the basic concepts of SOA and the goals that they
hoped to achieve through adoption. These presentations were open to the entire IT
organization, and did a great job in getting everyone on the same page.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Avoiding a Bunch of Services
[ 54 ]
While these initial communication efforts established their credibility, the team still
had some challenges ahead of them. During the time they were putting together the
presentations, their meetings were very productive. Now, however, as that work
was winding down, the team was finding it hard to get involved with the projects
that were going on in the organization. When the team had approached projects, the
projects weren't dismissive, but they also didn't freely share information either. Most
of the project teams just told the COE that they'd contact them if they needed them.
At the next meeting, Spencer brought this dilemma up. "I know we've all been
struggling with figuring out how to work with the project teams. I've given it some
thought, and I think part of our problem is that while we shared the reasons for why
we're adopting SOA, we didn't share the reasons why this COE exists and how we
expect projects to work with us."
Raj said, "I think you're right, Spencer. I can't tell you how many meetings that I've
tried to set up that have either been declined or gone through an endless sequence of
cancellation after cancellation."
Jared echoed the same sentiment, "I've had the same problems with project teams
in my area. While I know Elena told us that we have the authority to stop projects,
I simply haven't been able to get enough information out of them to even know
whether I need to stop them or not."
Spencer said, "Let's go back to the original direction Elena gave us. Besides the initial
communication, she indicated that we need to make sure that existing services are
being leveraged where appropriate, that service ownership is assigned to the right
group, and that when a service is identified, we take the time to determine what
other consumers may exist. If that's what we need to do, how do we go about
doing that?"
Raj replied, "Most of those questions can be answered at the early stages of the
project. Perhaps we should set up a review process after the project has come up
with its proposed architecture? That should be early enough that no development
has started."
Spencer said, "I think that's a great idea Raj. Let's try to put that in place, but let's
make sure that the projects know exactly why we're meeting with them. We need to
make the review process as painless as possible."
The team went on to determine the details of the review process, as well as other
things that they'd need to cover over the course of the project. The outcome was a
very clear engagement model of how they would interact with the project teams.
They went through it with the managers in their respective organizations, and from
that point on, their level of involvement with the project efforts improved steadily.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 3
[ 55 ]
Enterprise SOA Governance
In this chapter, Spencer and Elena find out that initial success doesn't immediately
translate into continued success. It began with the CIO, Andrea, giving her personal
endorsement to SOA and encouraging all of IT to embrace it. With the endorsement
of the CIO, how could the effort possibly go wrong? Clearly, it didn't take much.
If we go back to our original definition of governance, it is the people, policies, and
processes that an organization leverages to achieve a desired behavior. Therefore,
SOA governance is about achieving a desired behavior through SOA. A simple
statement of "go forth and adopt SOA" is not enough to articulate the desired
behavior, yet that's exactly what Andrea did. Without more explicit guidance on
what IT and the business hoped to achieve through the adoption of SOA, the results
will likely be little more than just a bunch of services. The normal behavior of project
teams is to only look within their own projects, so without explicit instructions to do
otherwise, those project teams will continue to do so. As a result, there is significant
risk of having multiple projects build the exact same service, as with the portfolio
management system. Even where the projects are broader in scope and more
opportunities exist, there is just as much of a chance of controversy, as with Maria,
Jim and Beth, as there is of actually achieving some success with SOA.
In order to achieve enterprise goals with your SOA adoption efforts, you need to
have enterprise governance. This begins with establishing and communicating those
goals as the desired behavior, and then putting the people, policies, and processes in
place to make it happen.
Establishing Goals
One of the things that Jared brought up in the very first meeting of the Center of
Excellence was that no one had properly articulated what the desired behavior
needed to be. A good litmus test to use when trying to establish the desired behavior
is to look at the phrasing of the behavior and see how many different ways it can be
interpreted. For example, compare the following statements.
We want to adopt SOA.
We want to reduce our development costs by 10%.
We want to increase the amount of code we reuse by 10%.
It should be very clear that the latter two statements are much more explicit about
the desired behavior. As with any high-level goal, there's still some room for
interpretation, but clearly, the first statement, which is the message that Andrea
delivered to IT, gives very few specifics. Another litmus test that can be used is
whether or not the behavior can be measured. If you can't measure it, how do you
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Avoiding a Bunch of Services
[ 56 ]
know you've achieved it? So, how would an organization measure their adoption of
SOA? It could be based upon the number of services created, the number of services
reused, the length of time to implement solutions, or the number of solutions
produced in a given time period. While broad, vague statements like, "We want
to increase our agility" certainly have meaning and can rally the troops, it is the
specifics that make it happen. Using our analogy of municipal government, setting
goals is very important to achieving the respect and authority necessary to provide
good governance. Would you rather vote for a politician that says, "I will make your
standard of living better," or one that says, "I will lower your taxes by 50% over
the next two years." One is at the risk of idle words, while the other has a specific
behavior in mind, and is well-positioned to create the policies to get there.
When establishing the desired behavior for your SOA efforts, you should give
careful thought on how to quantify the benefits. Two popular benefits frequently
mentioned in the press are reuse and agility. Of the two, reuse is the far easier one
to quantify, but it is also considered somewhat of a holy grail in IT circles. Many
technologies and approaches have claimed reuse as a benefit, but few, if any,
have lived up to the hype surrounding them, at least at the business level. At the
infrastructure level, there is no arguing that popular OO frameworks, such as .NET
and Java EE, have provided significant reuse to the enterprise. Despite this, reuse is
still a goal of many IT managers because there typically is an underlying assumption
that significant redundancy exists in the systems today. Unfortunately, it is very
unlikely that the staff have performed adequate analysis to know where the majority
of the redundancy is. Therefore, if one of your goals is reuse, your governance efforts
will need to address the behaviors of the project teams during the architecture and
analysis phases of the project. These phases are where opportunities for reuse must
be discovered.
Agility is a more difficult term to quantify. To be agile is to move quickly and
easily. Therefore, if an IT department wants to be more agile, that usually means
that they want to have a quicker response to the demands of the business. In other
words, productivity needs to improve. That means that either projects are getting
delivered faster, or a higher number of projects are being delivered in the same
time period, with a proportional adjustment based upon any increase or decrease
in staff. Software development efforts can be more productive through reuse, since
studies have shown that it takes far less time to integrate a reusable asset than it
would to build it a second time. Another path to higher productivity is through
increased modularity. By designing systems in a more modular fashion, the impact
of change can be reduced to a smaller set of IT systems, thereby reducing the time to
implement and test the change.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 3
[ 57 ]
As an example, here are some properly formed goals around agility and reuse:
Increase the number of assets reused by 10% each year.
Decrease the average time to produce a solution by 10% each year.
Increase the number of projects delivered by 10% each year.
In contrast, here are some example goals for SOA that are not as effective:
Adopt SOA.
Increase the number of services in the repository.
Increase the average number of services produced by each project by 10%
each year.
Clearly, the first goal is simply too vague. The latter two goals may look good on
the surface, but are actually quite problematic for one simple reason. Both of these
are not focused on consumption, which is the key to reuse and productivity, but
the act of service production. Simply building a bunch of services could actually be
detrimental to an organization as it increases the number of moving parts for any
given solution. If there is no good reason to separate two units of functionality into
two independent parts with their own lifecycles, they shouldn't be separated.
Roles
Once the goals and desired behaviors have been set and articulated, it can't be
successful without having people who have the responsibility for making sure those
goals and behaviors are followed. Remember, a goal is not a policy. A goal is an
outcome; a policy is a way of guiding someone towards that outcome. If a city wants
to reduce traffic accidents on a highway (the desired outcome), a policy that guides
drivers towards that outcome is to lower the speed limit. Likewise, if an enterprise
wants to increase the amount of reusable assets involved in solutions, a policy that
guides projects towards that outcome is that all projects must review the reusable
asset library as part of their architecture and analysis efforts.
In order to have policies, we need policy makers. In the example in this
chapter, this began with Enterprise Architecture, but was then delegated to a
cross-functional Center of Excellence that included architects, lead technical staff,
and lead analysts. The key is that these policy makers must be viewed as authorities
in the organization, which is perhaps the most difficult part of the entire effort.
While organization charts and mandates establish some level of authority, it does
not establish trust. If someone is not trusted, they will have increased difficulty in
maintaining their authority. As a result, they will be more likely to gravitate towards
heavy enforcement mechanisms that can further erode trust.
•
•
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Avoiding a Bunch of Services
[ 58 ]
In any organization, there are already roles that have some amount of implied
authority. Within a project structure, the roles of the project manager and the lead
architect or technical leader clearly have implied authority. Within an organizational
structure, the management hierarchy has implied authority. An enterprise
architecture organization frequently has either explicit or implied authority on
many technical decisions and architectural direction, although this authority can
vary widely from organization to organization. An organization may have several
standing committees that are seen as authoritative bodies, some of which may even
be called governance committees.
Enterprise Architecture
Enterprise Architecture, at a minimum, normally has oversight on the technical
architecture policies that guide solution development. This can range from standard
hardware platforms, operating systems, database platforms, application servers,
programming languages, security technologies, networking hardware, and more. In
the context of SOA, Enterprise Architecture is certainly a possibility for establishing
policies for Service Communication Technologies, Service Implementation
Technologies, and Service Interface Specification, as discussed in Chapter 2.
In some organizations, Enterprise Architecture may also include a business
architecture discipline. While the technical architecture policies are intended to guide
how an organization builds and integrates services, business architecture policies
are intended to guide what services an organization builds and integrates. While
technical architecture can be considered at the top of the ladder for development and
implementation activities, business architecture can be considered at the top of the
ladder for business analysis activities.
Information Architecture
Information architecture, as the name implies, normally has oversight over the
information assets of the organization. The previous chapter articulated the role of
the canonical model in ensuring a consistent representation of data across services.
Canonical models are usually the responsibility of the information architecture
team, and play a key role in service definition. In addition to this, the information
architecture team likely plays a key role in determining information classifications,
which can drive the use of encryption within services, as well as information
stewards and/or owners, which is a key data point when attempting to define
service ownership.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 3
[ 59 ]
IT Management
IT management normally has oversight on the IT staff within an organization. In our
example in this chapter, one of the efforts described had problems with determining
service ownership. This wasn't an issue with what service was being built or what
technologies that were being used to build it, but with who would build it. This is
not an architectural question, but a staffing question.
The biggest challenge that IT management faces with SOA adoption is that the
current organizational structure may be an inhibitor of the goals SOA wants
to achieve. In many organizations, teams have been aligned along the user
facing components of their systems, not along some of the back-end processing
components. Even in our example, Advasco had one team for home insurance
applications and another one for auto insurance applications. They each had their
own techniques for customer relationship management, ordering, billing, and
probably much more.
Business Management
Business management, in addition to having oversight on the business staff,
normally has oversight over a very critical part of the SOA effort: funding. While
an IT department has control over allocation of resources, they are still normally
operating within the funding constraints that have been imposed by the business
units. Even when the business is technology, there is likely a separation between
technologies that are used to run the business, versus technologies that actually
represent a revenue stream for the company.
Developers
Developers clearly have a major role in the implementation of SOA. While not
normally considered a position of authority, they are in the position of execution.
In addition, there are normally far more developers than there are architects in an
organization, so a great deal of policy adherence is always left to the discretion of the
individual developer. Successful involvement of representatives from the developer
community in the SOA governance effort can have a big impact.
Analysts
Like their development counterparts, analysts are focused on the implementation
of SOA. The developer's primary concern is how services get built; the analyst's
primary concern is what services get built. In addition, it is very common for the
analysts to have a much stronger connection to both IT management and business
management. Once again, given their role in the implementation effort, successful
involvement of them can have a big impact on the overall SOA governance effort.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Avoiding a Bunch of Services
[ 60 ]
Database Analysts (DBAs)
The DBA is the implementation counterpart to the information architect, just as
the developers and analysts are the implementation counterpart to the enterprise
architect. The DBAs have added insight into the storage and utilization of data by a
variety of applications, and this knowledge can be valuable during service definition.
Involvement of the DBAs in the SOA governance effort and as part of the Center of
Excellence is recommended.
Center of Excellence
If organizations already have authoritative bodies like Enterprise Architecture,
IT Management, and Business Management, why would they need a Center of
Excellence? Remember, organizational structures only position a group for authority,
they don't mandate it. Only by establishing credibility and trust will a group create
authority. In general, there are two reasons that organizations will create a SOA
Center of Excellence.
The first is to overcome a lack of trust in the existing organizations that are
positioned as authorities. Breaking down existing barriers and establishing a
cross-functional Center of Excellence can quickly form a new authoritative group.
When the constituents of an organization have representation on the governing
body, they are more likely to trust that their interests are being represented, although
it is very dependent on the representative chosen.
The second reason that an enterprise may create a SOA Center of Excellence is for
focus. All three groups mentioned earlier have other responsibilities outside of SOA.
As a result, SOA may not always be the top priority of their actions. By creating a
Center of Excellence, these organizations can delegate responsibilities (along with
other organizations that may not normally be involved with authoritative roles) to a
team whose first priority is SOA. This is a very important point, because one reason
many SOA efforts fail, as well as governance efforts, whether SOA or not, is that no
one has it as their top priority.
Not all organizations will need a Center of Excellence. Advasco did. Your company
may need it. Your competitor may not. Just as there are many styles of government
in the world that can be considered successful, there are many styles of SOA
governance that can be applied in an organization and achieve success with SOA. In
determining whether you need it or not, look at your existing organization and how
other governance in other areas is applied. If your current governance efforts are
successful, you may be able to fold in policies around SOA adoption. If your current
governance efforts are struggling, or the teams involved are stretched thin, a Center
of Excellence may be a good fit for you. Remember that the goal of the governance
efforts is to ensure that the desired behavior is achieved. The organization must
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 3
[ 61 ]
always be measuring their performance against that behavior, and if the organization
is not achieving that behavior, a change needs to be made.
Traditional Authority
Traditional Execution
IT Management
Enterprise
Architecture
Information
Architecture
Business
Management Center of Excellence
Lead Developers Lead Analysts
DBAs
Engagement Model
Regardless of whether you choose to leverage existing groups within your
organization or form a Center of Excellence, a key to success is having a well-defined
engagement model. In our example, the Center of Excellence initially focused on
communication to the IT organization about the goals of the SOA effort, but once
that communication was complete, they struggled to remain relevant.
Any governance organization has this risk. In the context of traditional government,
a frequent complaint is that the government is out of touch with its constituents. The
same holds true within the IT department. Many people working in the trenches will
make comments about Enterprise Architecture sitting in an ivory tower or upper
management sitting in their corner offices. This implies that these workers feel
that the people responsible for governance are out of touch with the work that
is occurring.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Avoiding a Bunch of Services
[ 62 ]
In order to mediate this risk, the people responsible for governance must have a
clearly defined and communicated engagement model for how they work with
the projects that are occurring in the enterprise. For example, if the Enterprise
Architecture team chooses to have all projects go through an architectural review in
front of the entire Enterprise Architecture team, it must ensure that projects clearly
understand when this review must be performed, what people need to be involved,
what needs to be presented, and what the possible outcomes of the review are.
If you are leveraging a Center of Excellence, then you must decide what role it
will have on projects. Will the staff act solely as a review board for projects or will
individuals from the Center of Excellence be assigned to projects? If assigned to
projects, will they act as mentors, or will they be actual project participants? Or, will
the Center of Excellence take a different approach and act in an outsourcing capacity,
with projects handing off their service development efforts to it?
There is no standard engagement model that all organizations should use. The only
wrong engagement model is to not have one specified. If your organization lacks the
necessary skills to build services to begin with, then perhaps an outsourcing model
is the right approach, gradually increasing the size of the team to increase skills,
until a critical mass is reached. At that point, the team can now be distributed back
throughout the organization. However, this approach has its risks. A centralized
group may have the technical skills necessary to build services, but they probably
will not have the knowledge of all possible business domains where services will be
built. An alternative approach to this is to be a staffing solution for projects, rather
than an outsourcing solution. Rather than projects sending work to the Center of
Excellence, the Center of Excellence sends resources to the projects. These resources
can act as a mentor to others on the project team, or be a full-fledged member of the
project, performing analysis or development activities as appropriate. By working
with the project team in any capacity, the resource or resources assigned can spread
the knowledge of SOA to other members of the project team.
If the organization is not lacking skills in service development, then it is more likely
that the Center of Excellence exists to facilitate inter-project and inter-organization
communication. This is also a scenario where an existing team, such as Enterprise
Architecture may also be suitable. Regardless of whether it is a Center of Excellence
or some other group, the problem at hand is that an engagement with the project
team is not required for the project team to complete their work. However, it may
be required in order for the project team to complete their work in a way that meets
the goals of the SOA effort. In this scenario, the governance team must look at
the natural checkpoints in the project effort and decide if they are appropriate for
whatever reviews might be necessary.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 3
[ 63 ]
Finally, it should be mentioned that the engagement model could be focused outside
of project efforts. Rather than focusing on reviews within the project lifecycle, an
organization can instead focus on education of the staff. The risk with this approach
is still the project-driven culture of most organizations. If the project staff can be
trusted to know when to go beyond the boundaries of the project to reach out to
other teams, adjusting their own priorities and scope as necessary, it is possible to
get by with only an education-based approach. Unfortunately, this level of trust,
along with the necessary clarity of goals and relative priorities rarely exists within
organizations. In the end, the most common approach taken by most organizations is
a combination of education, mentoring, staff augmentation, and formal reviews.
Design-Time Checkpoints
Clearly, checkpoints play a key role in governance. In the previous chapter,
we discussed some of the items that must be factored into the existing project
governance structure. These were a natural extension of the technical reviews that
normally take place in a review, factoring in technical items that are specific to
service development. However, these aren't the only changes required to the project
governance process.
In our example, the Center of Excellence chose an engagement model that required
them to conduct reviews of the projects. In their kickoff meeting, Elena specifically
mentioned that the Center of Excellence needed to:
Share the efforts of their respective areas with the rest of the Center
of Excellence
Enable interactions between service providers and service consumers across
the organization where they normally would not exist
Ensure that existing services get reused
Ensure that projects that are building services seek out consumers
Escalate service ownership decisions to management
The items that were covered in the previous chapter ensure that services are
built consistently. The items above, in contrast, deal more with ensuring that the
project teams look outside of their project boundaries for either services that can
be leveraged, or consumers that may be interested in services that the project
is building.
•
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Avoiding a Bunch of Services
[ 64 ]
Whether you're trying to define your review process or trying to enable the project
team to make good decisions on their own, it is important to look at the entire
software development lifecycle and determine the appropriate time to ask these
questions. While most development projects today follow an iterative methodology,
it still holds true that there are analysis artifacts, architecture artifacts, design
artifacts, and development artifacts that will be produced by the project team. As
each of these artifacts are produced and refined, questions can be asked within the
project team or by the review team.
Analysis Checkpoint
The objective of analysis is primarily to establish detailed requirements for the
desired solution. If the project or program is very large in scope, the team should also
have an understanding of the business domains involved in the solution, and should
be forming an idea of the business services involved and their potential consumers.
In the context of SOA, the key question that must be asked is whether or not the
analysis artifacts provide sufficient detail to determine an initial set of services that
are required for the solution. If the project architect cannot review the artifacts and
establish a proposed architecture for the solution, then the analysis has not gone into
sufficient depth.
Architecture Checkpoint
The objective of the architecture phase is to establish the major components that
will define the solution. A major component is one that allows the work to be
broken down into units that can be independently managed. Not surprisingly, the
lines on which those components are separated normally represent candidates for
service consumer and service provider relationships. It is at this point where service
ownership decisions should be finalized, because the best scenario for development
is to have the eventual owner involved, rather than having to do a handoff from the
development team to the actual service owner. Based on this, the following questions
associated with SOA adoption should be asked at the architectural checkpoint:
Do the boundaries defined by the architecture clearly define the service
consumers and service providers that constitute the solution?
Which of the services are new, and which ones represent existing services?
Which of the services are provided by the third-party systems or
external providers?
Have all the new services clearly identified owners, and have they
been engaged?
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 3
[ 65 ]
Have the service managers for existing services been engaged to determine if
any changes are required to meet the requirements of the new consumers?
Have all potential consumers of the new services been identified
and engaged?
Have service development efforts been sufficiently disconnected from
service consumer development efforts, such as spinning them off as
separate projects?
Have all proposed services and associated business and technical metadata
been entered into the service repository and/or other metadata management
systems (for example, configuration management database)?
Have all service consumers been entered into the service repository
and/or other metadata management systems (for example, configuration
management database)?
Design Checkpoint
The design phase of a project goes within the black boxes and focuses on
implementation of the services and associated service consumers. It should be noted
that what was a single program or project may now be multiple efforts. It is at this
point where iterative development should begin. If the iterative process has begun
too early, it is possible that the architectural boundaries may get established too late
in the process, potentially after some service development has already begun. This
puts the project at risk for choosing incorrect service platforms, not having service
owners engaged from the beginning, and not having a complete view of all of the
possible consumers for each service.
At this phase in the project, the following questions associated with SOA adoption
can be asked:
Are the service interfaces using message formats from the canonical model?
Have initial service contracts been defined between all known
service consumers?
Has the project established service contracts with services being provided by
other teams, third-party packages, or external providers?
Do the service contracts include release schedules for milestone builds that
are synchronized with the schedule for service consumer development?
Have service types been identified for all services, and appropriate service
implementation platforms chosen based on those types?
Have the non-functional requirements of the service been appropriately
externalized from the business logic of the service?
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Avoiding a Bunch of Services
[ 66 ]
Have all naming conventions for services (for example, URLs, XML
namespaces) been followed, both for the production environment and the
development environments?
Is there an appropriate separation between the service interface (XML
Schema and/or WSDL definition) and the planned service implementation?
For Web Services, is the service compliant with the WS-I Basic Profile 1.1?
Do all service interfaces and/or contracts address exceptions and
errors appropriately?
Are all schemas in web services externally referenced via import?
Are attributes and child elements used appropriately within XML schemas?
Have data sensitivity requirements been identified for all data elements
involved with message interactions?
Have transactional requirements been identified for all service operations?
Have test cases been established for all service operations?
Are all services free of references to implement specific details?
Implementation Checkpoints
At this point, the focus should be on how well the service implementation has
adhered to the original design. While existing governance processes may focus
on coding standards that apply to any development effort, there are still some
additional questions that can be asked that are relevant to SOA adoption. They are:
Have service consumers been packaged separately from service providers?
Is the service interface appropriately separated from the service
implementation, including any processing that binds or maps an internal
processing model (for example, object model) to the messaging model
(for example, XML Schema) associated with the service interface?
Operational Readiness Checkpoint
Prior to going live, all components of the solution should be reviewed for their
operational readiness. Again, this should already be part of your standard
governance practices, but when now deploying service consumers and service
providers, the following questions are relevant to SOA adoption and should
be considered:
Do all services have an assigned service owner?
Do all service consumers have an assigned point of contact?
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 3
[ 67 ]
Have operational reports been defined for all service consumers and
service providers?
Have all records in the service repository and other metadata repositories
(for example, configuration management database) been updated for the
service consumers and service providers?
Have all service contracts been finalized?
Service Portfolio Management
A consistent theme throughout this chapter has been raising the awareness of project
teams to other services and consumers in the enterprise. While there's a certain
amount of improvement that can happen simply through word of mouth, in general,
that approach is not sustainable. For example, in the past, there were efforts to raise
awareness of applications and their database dependencies. One or two select people
may have had knowledge of 80% of the applications associated with one database
based upon their experiences, when we expand this out to all applications and all
databases the problem quickly becomes unmanageable, with no single person having
the complete view. As a result, many organizations are now undertaking application
portfolio management efforts simply to get their arms around the problem.
In contrast, we are in the early stages of SOA adoption and can prevent the same
situation from occurring in the context of services. To do this, an organization should
practice service portfolio management. The portfolio is always changing, with new
services and their consumers being generated, while older services or consumers
may be decommissioned. While it is certainly possible that a small organization can
manage this effectively through the use of nothing more than an Excel spreadsheet,
larger organizations can optimize their efforts through the use of a Service
Registry/Repository.
The Service Registry/Repository
The Service Registry/Repository is one of two tools most frequently associated with
SOA governance. Keep in mind that governance, first and foremost, is about people,
policies, and processes. You cannot buy governance. You can, however, buy tools
that can make your governance efforts more efficient, and the Service Registry/
Repository definitely falls into that area.
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Avoiding a Bunch of Services
[ 68 ]
Most companies that are adopting SOA include reuse as part of their desired
behaviors. In order to be reused, consumers of those services must be aware of their
existence. If they don't know that a service is available, they're going to build or
buy their own, creating redundant solutions. While the processes that have been
described in this chapter are intended to raise awareness of what services exist,
individual members of the governance teams, whether a Center of Excellence or
existing organizations, cannot be expected to know about every single service that
exists, especially as the portfolio of services grows over time. Imagine going to a
library where there is no card catalog (or these days, a computer-based directory),
only librarians. While the librarians will probably have a better knowledge of the
books in the library in comparison to anyone else, any individual librarian will only
be aware of a fraction of the books available. Now, while the typical enterprise won't
have as many services as a library has books, the amount of tribal knowledge is
rampant. Most project documentation is exactly that project documentation. When the
project ends, the value of the documentation does as well. The only information that
is retained is what is in the minds of the project staff.
With SOA, the opportunity now exists to do this right from the beginning, and that
starts with creating and preserving information about the service as early as possible.
Recall that at the analysis checkpoint, the project team should be forming an idea of
the services needed for the solution, and at the architectural checkpoint, the project
team should have a clear idea of the services necessary. Additionally, the project
team should know which of those services already exist. They can identify so by
querying the registry/repository. At the same time, all of the services that aren't in
the registry/repository need to be entered. The time to enter new services is when
they are first identified. The reason for this is that there are always multiple projects
occurring simultaneously. This creates a risk that there are two (or more) projects
that will need the same service. If projects wait to enter a service in the registry/
repository until it has been built and deployed into production, another project may
be well into their own implementation of the exact same service before there's ever
any record of its existence.
Initially, it may seem that the only role for the registry/repository in the space
of design-time governance is as a human facing catalog to allow project teams
to identify services that already exist, and publish the services that they create.
However, it does go beyond this. First, awareness is only part of the equation. As
shown in the example in this chapter, if there is no one responsible for the service
after it goes into production, not just for making sure it continues to run properly,
but to manage the interest that other consumers may have, the organization will
have problems. The registry/repository plays a key role in managing the aspects of
the consumer/provider relationship, from allowing a consumer to find the proper
person to talk to, to allowing a provider to notify all consumers of a service of
upcoming changes.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 3
[ 69 ]
Additionally, there are always advances being made in the tools that are being used
in the development process. At present, one of the increasingly popular tools is
business process management systems. While there are many capabilities associated
with these systems, one capability that they do have is the ability to build automated
processes, which normally consist of an orchestrated sequence of services. They
do this through the use of a graphical editor. This model-driven approach can be
much more efficient for certain types of development. In order to make it even
more efficient, however, a connection between a registry/repository of services is
necessary so that services that need to be orchestrated in an automated process can
simply be dragged and dropped into the tool. To understand the importance of the
registry/repository for future development efforts, one only needs to look at two
of the largest companies in the software development space. SAP, with their highly
integrated suite of applications, has a registry/repository at its heart. Microsoft,
as part of their Oslo strategy announced in 2007, also has a registry/repository at
its heart. The need goes beyond a simple catalog, and if used properly a registry/
repository can make both your governance efforts and your development efforts
more efficient.
Summary
In this chapter, the examples demonstrated how a lack of clearly defined goals
can impact the SOA effort. We also saw the challenges that SOA introduces into
an organization that is quite used to self-contained projects without outside
dependencies. They ranged from redundant services because of lack of awareness, to
controversy over whose project would be responsible for a shared service, and finally
to a lack of resources available to make updates to the service because the original
project that built it had been completed, with the team reallocated to other efforts.
In an effort to change the behavior within projects, Advasco formed a Center of
Excellence. The first task they took on was to provide definition to the SOA effort
and establish concrete goals. Second, they embarked on an education effort to
ensure that the development staff was aware of the desired behavior and the new
policies associated with SOA. When they failed to see significant progress, the team
formalized an engagement model to ensure that the communication lines between
the projects and the Center of Excellence would stay open and that appropriate
behavior could be monitored and enforced, if necessary.
Several important lessons were illustrated in this chapter. First, an organization must
define the desired behavior and goals of their SOA efforts. An organization must be
able to articulate why they are adopting SOA, and clearly state the desired outcome
in a way that can be measured. If the outcome cannot be measured, then there is no
way for the organization to know when their adoption efforts have been successful.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Avoiding a Bunch of Services
[ 70 ]
Next, once the desired behavior and goals are known, the organization must put
people in place to establish the policies and processes that will ensure that the
desired behavior is reached. These people can be existing teams in the organization,
or it can be a newly formed team, such as a Center of Excellence. If the organization
has not established the desired behavior and goals clearly, the first task of the
governance team is to establish them.
Next, the governance team must define the policies that will guide the organization
towards the desired outcome. For example, if the desired outcome is a 20% reduction
in the time it takes to complete a typical project, the team must determine what
change in the software development process will result in that 20% reduction. As a
way of getting started, the team can look at the natural checkpoints associated with a
typical project, including an analysis checkpoint, an architecture checkpoint, a design
checkpoint, an implementation checkpoint, and an operational readiness checkpoint.
At each of these checkpoints, the team must determine the questions that should be
asked to determine if a project is on the right path, and then what policies need to be
implemented to ensure that projects find that path and stay on it.
Finally, we explored the process component of design time governance. Governance
processes do not necessarily equate with big checkpoint reviews in front of a review
board. In fact, they need not be associated with enforcement at all. Governance
processes can and should involve both educational processes and enforcement
processes. If a team focuses too much on education, they risk putting themselves
outside of the loop on project activities, putting compliance at risk. If a team focuses
too much on enforcement, they risk creating resentment in the organization, since
the teams will be unaware of the policies that must be followed but will still be held
accountable when they fail to comply with those policies.
In creating these processes, tools can be leveraged to make the overall governance
effort more efficient. While you cannot buy governance, you can buy tools that can
make your efforts much easier. A key tool in the SOA governance space is the Service
Registry/Repository. This tool provides the mechanism by which consumers can
find out what services exist, and what team is responsible for them. This tool can also
be integrated into the development environment to facilitate the inclusion of services
in the new breed of graphical, model-driven platforms.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Service Versioning
Advasco had initial success with their Customer Information Service and then
opened the flood gates for development by the rest of the organization. These efforts
were successfully reigned in by the newly formed SOA Center of Excellence. Now,
the team at Advasco faces a new challenge: modifying an existing service to handle
the needs of a new consumer. This chapter will go over the challenges faced by
the team and then present guidance for handling this situation within your
own organization.
Making a Change
For the next few months, the Center of Excellence paid off. Projects were identifying
services early in the lifecycle. Those same projects were successfully identifying other
potential consumers of these new services. Implementation technologies were being
chosen correctly and interface design was being properly done. Most importantly,
everyone felt the SOA effort was on track.
By this time, it had been almost two years since Spencer's team developed the
Customer Information Service for the auto insurance and home insurance divisions.
While these two groups were very happy with the results, no additional teams had
leveraged it. Outside of the annuity project, this wasn't a case of projects going in
another direction; it was more due to lack of opportunities. That was about
to change.
Spencer was eating lunch in the cafeteria when Ramesh walked up. "Mind if I join
you, Spencer?"
"Hey Ramesh, it's been quite some time. Go ahead and pull up a chair."
"Do you remember two years ago you tried to convince Ryan to use your Customer
Information Service?"
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Service Versioning
[ 72 ]
"I sure do. I didn't want to show my face in the annuity area for about a month after
that. He really wasn't very receptive to the idea."
"Well, I have some good news and some better news for you. The good news is
that about six months later, Ryan decided to leave Advasco. The better news is that
we've now got a major initiative to revamp a number of our systems in the annuity
department. I'd like to take advantage of the Customer Information Service as part of
that effort."
"That's good news Ramesh. I didn't harbor any resentment towards Ryan, but
I'm certainly happy about having another potential consumer for the Customer
Information Service. I'll put you in touch with the service manager for it."
"Thanks Spencer. That would be great. We're just getting started on our architecture,
so the timing is perfect."
"Let me know if you run into any problems. I'm still part of the SOA Center of
Excellence, so it's still my job to make sure it goes well!"
Spencer put Ramesh in contact with the service manager for the Customer
Information Service, Maria. Maria had recently transferred over after her work
on the account maintenance effort, and now had responsibilities for the Customer
Information Service. In the meeting with Ramesh, she brought her technical lead,
Craig, with her.
"Spencer told me that you're interested in utilizing the Customer Information Service
in some of the new systems you're building in the annuity department, Ramesh."
"That's right. We're rewriting a number of our systems, and based on what I
remembered from Spencer two years ago, I thought we might be able to leverage
the service."
"Great, I'd be happy to help you out. This is Craig, the technical lead who covers the
Customer Information Service. He's here if you've got any technical questions. Have
you had a chance to review the information available in the service repository?"
"I have. I reviewed the service interface, and while it certainly looks like there's
enough there to warrant using the service rather than building our own, there's also
a number of additional things that we'll need."
Craig responded, "What kind of changes are you looking for? Are there new
operations that you need that are specific to the annuity area?"
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 4
[ 73 ]
Ramesh said, "There are two or three operations that we'd like to see, but most of the
changes are actually in the message schemas for the existing operations. There are
some additional attributes that we need, and some of the relationships between the
attributes are different in our representation."
For the rest of the meeting, Ramesh and Craig went through the changes that
Ramesh wanted to be made to accommodate his needs. In the end, it was clear that
some changes to the existing schemas would have to be made. Maria asked, "We're
going to need to go back and look over these changes, along with the integration
approach for your existing database. What does the schedule for your efforts
currently look like?"
Ramesh replied, "We're still in the initial stages of planning, which is why I wanted
to make sure I talked to you now. Right now, the project sponsors would like to have
something within six months, but they also know that nine months is far more likely.
Since I have some flexibility in my schedule, why don't you take a week to look into
the effort required for the changes, and let's work out the schedule then. Does that
work for you?"
"That works for me. We'll get back to you next week with what we think it will take
to implement the changes."
On the way back to their desks, Craig commented to Maria, "You know, while I don't
have any concerns about getting the work done for Ramesh, I do have some concerns
on how these changes are going to impact our existing consumers. Some of these
changes are going to break the existing interfaces."
Maria said, "That is a concern. I know that there aren't any resources available to do
any work on the home insurance side of things. Any suggestions on how we should
handle this?"
Craig said, "Well, we definitely should make the existing consumers aware that a
change is going to be made and at least get a clear idea of what the impact will be. If
you can take care of that, I can take this to Spencer and the SOA Center of Excellence,
and see what suggestions they have."
"That sounds like a good plan to me," replied Maria.
Over the next week, the Customer Information Service team did the analysis
required to estimate how long the changes would take to implement. Maria used the
communication features of the service registry/repository to push out a message to
the existing consumers about the pending change, and as she suspected, the biggest
problem was going to be the home insurance system. Due to other priorities, the
earliest they could even begin to make changes to their consumer would be nine
months from now, potentially three months after the service needed to go live.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Service Versioning
[ 74 ]
Craig met with Spencer and explained the problem to him. Spencer agreed to
facilitate a decision-making session to explore the different options. Representatives
from all of the existing consumers were there, along with Ramesh, Craig, and Maria.
Spencer started the meeting, "I'm sure all of you saw the notification from Maria last
week that some changes are necessary to the Customer Information Service in order
to support its usage by the annuity department. The problem that we face is that
these changes will break the existing consumers of the service, and not all of you can
make the changes to your systems in the currently proposed timeframe. Let's start
out by listing all possible options, regardless of whether we all presently agree or
disagree on their viability."
Craig started out, "Well, if we're listing all possible options, the first one is to
update the service, and then get whatever push we need from management to get
resources allocated to the consuming systems so they can make the changes in the
time required."
Maria replied, "Come on Craig, you know that we can't just pull resources off
projects that easily."
Jason, from the auto insurance department, added, "Aren't all of these changes
a result of the annuity department? Why can't they just include modifying our
applications within their project scope? They already have resources allocated to
their project."
Paul, from the home insurance department, replied, "Do you really want some
developers that have never seen your application before mucking around in your
code? I know I don't."
Spencer said, "Let's remember, we're listing all options, regardless of whether we
all know that the option won't fly. We want to make sure we've explored all of the
options. I'm going to just leave this as one option, since we still wind up with the
same result, regardless of where the resources come from. I'll capture the concerns
about the option."
Paul, from the home insurance group, added, "Okay, here's another option. Why
don't we leave the existing service in place, and simply have the annuity project
write a new service that just they use. Then, none of us using the existing service
would be impacted."
Craig replied, "That's true, but isn't that going against everything we're trying to
do with SOA? I thought we were trying to avoid redundant implementations of the
same capability."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 4
[ 75 ]
Spencer replied, "Duly noted, Craig. Just as with the last option, let's keep it on the
board, and I'll make sure that your concerns are captured. Paul, that option actually
triggered another one in my mind. In addition to having Maria's team write the new
service for the annuity system, why couldn't they also keep the existing version of
the service available in production for the rest of you? You can then migrate as your
schedules allow."
Paul and Jason both replied in tandem, "That would work for us!"
Maria jumped into the conversation, "While I'm sure it would, that sets a very
dangerous precedent for my team. How many versions of the service are we going
to have to maintain? While it's a little bit better when all the implementations are
owned by one team, we still have multiple implementations."
Jason then asked, "Isn't there a way to make the new service backwards compatible
with the messages associated with the old service? That way, Maria's team
would only have one implementation, but we could each continue to use our
existing interface."
Spencer replied, "That's a very good question Jason. While we all agree that the
service interface needs to change to support the annuity department's requirements,
I don't know that any of us have thought about whether we can easily transform
messages associated with the previous version to messages that will work with
the new version, and vice versa. Craig, you're the one most familiar with the new
proposed schemas. Do you think we could leverage XSLT to apply transformations
for backward compatibility?"
"Yes, I think it's possible. The only concern I have is what impact this will have on
the service implementation. Working with XSLT within Java code isn't the easiest
thing to do, and as we make future modifications, that's just going to get uglier
and uglier."
Spencer said, "There's another option for that. A year ago, we put some XML
appliances in place for security purposes. I know they have XSLT capabilities and
they're already in the request path."
Craig replied, "Of all the options, I think that one would work out the best. I really
don't like the idea of maintaining multiple versions of the service, and having to
maintain all of that XSLT code within the service is only slightly better. Allowing the
annuity group to write their own goes against everything we're trying to do
with SOA."
Spencer said, "Well, we know where Craig stands. Are there any other options that
we should look into? No? Well, what does everyone think?"
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Service Versioning
[ 76 ]
Paul was first, "We know that we're not going to find resources to make the changes
in all of the consumers at the same time, so that option is out. Likewise, it doesn't
make sense for Ramesh's team to write their own service given our SOA goals,
so that one is out, too. As for whether Maria's team maintains two versions of the
service or utilizes some transformations somewhere, it really doesn't matter to me.
From my perspective, both options give me the freedom to migrate at the time that
works best for me."
Jason immediately added, "I agree with everything Paul just said."
Ramesh then offered his opinion, "Well, I certainly know that I don't want to give
up any of my developers to work on Jason's and Paul's systems. We need every
developer we can get right now. As for writing our own service, we've already been
down that path two years ago, and now we're obviously changing the system again.
If we had migrated to the service earlier, it would be one less thing that we had to
touch as part of these changes. As long as Maria's team delivers my service on time
for my projects, it doesn't matter to me what Maria's team chooses to do on
their side."
Spencer replied, "Well Maria, it looks like everyone else thinks that we need a
solution that will allow all of the consumers to continue to use their existing
interfaces or the new one, but the details of how that happens is completely up to
you and Craig."
Maria said, "Let's not jump to conclusions yet. If I'm going to maintain multiple
versions, I need some kind of guarantee that the existing consumers will eventually
migrate to the new version. If my team allows continuous use of the old interface for
12 months from the time the new interface goes live, would that be an adequate time
to complete whatever modifications are necessary?"
Jason and Paul thought about it and decided that this was reasonable. For the past
three years, they'd averaged an update every nine months.
Maria said, "I'll make sure to remind you, early and often, that the old version and
its associated interfaces are going to be decommissioned. In the meantime, I'd like
to first get the new version built. I'm going to need to keep both versions around
initially just to compare messages. Ramesh's team can begin using the new service,
and…" As she was talking, she stopped mid-sentence.
Spencer said, "Is there a problem, Maria?"
She replied, "Well, I was just thinking, how are we going to avoid having two
URL's out there? The existing consumers are using a URL that points to the XML
appliances, right? We want to apply transformations to that path. What URL will
Ramesh's team use? We don't want to try to apply transformations to their requests."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 4
[ 77 ]
Spencer said, "Fortunately, I don't think we'll need to do that. We'll need to talk
to the team that operates the appliances to be sure, but I'm pretty sure that the
appliances can apply processing based upon incoming attributes on the message. As
long as we can determine which requests came from which consumer based on the
message content, we should be able to control when transformations happen, while
having all the existing consumers using a single URL. We'll obviously need multiple
URLs behind the intermediary, but that will be hidden from the consumers."
Maria replied, "Okay, that eases some of my fears. Just make sure you find out
quickly whether the appliances can handle it or not. Until we find out, can we set
up a simple routing rule so that requests from the annuity group go to the new
service, while the old ones stay where they are? That way, Ramesh can use the new
service as soon as it is available, and Craig and his team can start working on the
transformations for backward compatibility. I'd like to wait and see how that work
goes before deciding whether to leave both versions out there for 12 months or to
leverage the intermediary. We've never used that functionality before, and I
don't want to take a chance on impacting Ramesh's schedule in case we run into
difficulty. By keeping both services available in production at first, we can
eliminate any dependency between the decommissioning of the old service and
Ramesh's schedule."
Craig added, "From my point of view, that shouldn't be a problem. I can treat the
new version as if it were a completely new service, as long as the intermediary
shields the consumers from that change. I will need to check how we can manage
both versions at the source code level, though."
Maria responded, "Good points, Craig. Taking all of this into account, I think this
approach poses the least risk overall."
Spencer said, "Then we're all in agreement, right? Maria's team will build a new
version of the service according to the new interface, and the old interface will be
available for 12 months from the time the new service is deployed. Initially, both
versions will be available in production, but Maria can decommission the old
service before 12 months are up, so long as the new version can be made backwards
compatible via XSLT transformations. Maria will notify all consumers prior to
decommissioning the old service, since regression testing will be required to ensure
that backward compatibility has been maintained. She will also notify all consumers
as we get closer to the 12 month cutoff when the older interface will no longer
be supported."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Service Versioning
[ 78 ]
Everyone in the meeting agreed with this approach, and the teams went off and
made it happen. Craig's team investigated the best way to apply the transformations,
testing them using the latest Java libraries, as well as the XML appliances that
Advasco had recently installed. They found that the XML appliances performed
very well, and kept the programming model of the service very clean. While the Java
libraries performed satisfactorily, the resulting programming model was not as clean
as the team desired. With the use of the routing rules in the appliance, they were able
to remove the older version of the service from production, while still supporting the
older messages for the full 12 months as promised.
The Chief Information Officer's Concern
About two months later, Elena was in her monthly meeting with Andrea. Andrea
brought up the subject of service versioning. "I understand there was quite a bit of
debate around how to accommodate the needs of the annuity department in the
Customer Information Service."
Elena replied, "I wouldn't say that there was that much debate. Spencer facilitated a
decision-making session, and I encouraged all of my team to put all of the options on
the table, regardless of their viability. The real debate came down to whether or not
Maria's team wanted to maintain two implementations of the service in production,
or two versions of the service interface in production."
"That's actually what I wanted to talk to you about. Now that we have a number of
services that have multiple consumers, changes to those services could really become
a problem. Maria's example is probably just the first of many to come. While we
handled this one, I don't think having a facilitated session for every service change is
going to scale well."
"I agree. This is a situation that we really haven't had to deal with much in the past.
When our focus was solely applications, it was always the same set of end users
that wanted to see some changes made. There was never a need to deal with
multiple versions."
"I'd like for you to take this to the SOA Center of Excellence and have them come up
with some recommendations around service versioning. Let's get ahead of this one
before it becomes a problem."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 4
[ 79 ]
The COE Tackles Service Versioning Policies
Elena met with Spencer later on in the day and relayed the conversation she had
with the CIO. At the next meeting of the Center of Excellence, Spencer brought the
team up to speed on the discussion between Andrea and Elena. He went through the
efforts associated with Maria's Customer Information Service, and then asked the
team for their thoughts.
The first person to comment was Jared, "I'm really surprised that this got Andrea's
attention. I don't think any of the services that I've worked with yet have needed to
be touched since version 1.0."
Another team member, Ron, concurred, "I agree. We've only had one service in my
area that's had to be modified since its initial release, and in that case, it only had one
consumer that moved in lock-step."
Raj countered these statements, "I have to disagree with you. In my area, we have at
least five services that will be modified in the next six months. I think Andrea and
Elena are right to have us look into this."
Spencer added, "Yes, remember, they didn't ask us to tell them whether there was a
need to deal with versioning or not, they asked us to come up with some policies to
ensure that when versioning does occur, we have some standard guidance on how to
handle it."
Raj quickly offered his opinion, "I have some thoughts on this. Services are all
about consumption, right? We've all said that a service is no good unless it can
be consumed, right? Well, if that's the case, shouldn't we do whatever we can to
accommodate service consumption? I think we shouldn't put a limit on the number
of versions of a service interface that must be supported in production. In fact, I
think we should make it a requirement that a service provider supports whatever
interfaces are currently needed by its consumers. While my area is the one that has a
number of changes coming, those changes tend to be driven by one consumer. Most
of the other consumers don't change very often, probably even less frequently than
when your services might change, Jared."
Jared countered, "Raj, I have to disagree with you. Trying to maintain a potentially
limitless number of service interfaces would quickly become a nightmare for the
service development team."
"But are you willing to sacrifice consumers for the sake of having a smaller number
of interfaces to manage?" Raj asked.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Service Versioning
[ 80 ]
Jared replied, "Remember, I've worked in the commercial software world before
joining Advasco. The company I worked for had made so many different versions
of our product to meet the specifications of our customers that we got ourselves in
trouble. We had to make a change to a single capability, but due to all the branches
that had been made in the code, the effort took months longer than it should have.
As a result, we lost customers, not because we didn't make changes when they first
came along, but because we had no ability to change quickly when a number of
customers required the same modifications."
Raj responded, "I can see your point, however, I don't think that means the service
providers can go to the opposite extreme and expect that consumers will incorporate
whatever change they decide to throw out."
Spencer decided to interrupt the debate, "You've both raised two important, yet
conflicting viewpoints. On the one hand, we have the service consumers. These
consumers expect to have their demands met, and if there is an alternative path that
meets those demands more quickly, they'll probably take it. This leads to a desire
to bend over backwards to meet the demands of any consumer, even if it means
having many, many versions of the service. On the other hand, we have the service
providers. In order to provide good service, the team needs to keep the number
of versions it provides to a minimum. While it's all managed by one team, we're
really creating the exact same problem that we have today—the same logic being
implemented in multiple places, and as a result, the time required to implement a
change goes up."
He continued, "It seems that the thing we need to do is to come up with a policy that
balances the needs of both the consumer and the provider. We clearly can't have an
unlimited number of versions, but we also can't have just one version available."
Ron replied, "In the case of my area, we sometimes don't touch an application for
18 months."
Raj added, "My department is the same. I'd say that the majority of applications are
only modified once every 12 to 18 months, with a few even longer than that."
Jared commented, "We have more turnover in my area. Just about everything gets
released at least once a year. The few applications that don't, usually wind up getting
decommissioned in the next year."
Spencer asked, "What's a realistic timeframe for service updates? In the case of the
Customer Information Service, we almost went two full years without needing an
update. I also know of at least two other services that have been updated every
six months."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 4
[ 81 ]
Raj replied, "Our services follow a similar pattern. I haven't seen anything that's
updated more than twice a year. Some services are updated every nine months; some
are updated every 12 or 15 months. There doesn't seem to be a standard pattern."
Spencer then said, "Let's look at this from a different perspective. Since it appears
that all of our systems are updated at different intervals, let's instead look at what's
realistic. We know maintaining one version of the service isn't enough. If we
maintained two versions of the service, the worst case would be that the consumers
only had six months to make their changes, presuming a new version was released
every six months. If there were 18 months between versions, they'd have 18 months.
If we maintained three versions of the service, the worst case now goes out to 12
months. If version 1 was in production, and version 2 was released in March, version
3 would be released in September, and then version 4 in March of the following year.
That's also assuming that consumers aren't notified until the version goes live. What
is more likely to happen is that version 2 would be announced early in the process.
Realistically, a system using version 1 would probably have about 14 to 16 months to
make their changes. For a service that is only updated every 18 months, we're now
talking about three years or more to make the necessary changes."
Raj replied, "What if the service is updated every two months, or even more
frequently than that?"
Spencer answered, "While it's certainly possible that a service could be updated more
frequently, do we really think that the interface would change that frequently? I'm
sure if we have projects that are updated that frequently, it is probably more likely
to be bug fixes or other small changes that don't cause any change to the service
interface. If the actual service interface does change that frequently, I think that the
service team probably hasn't done a good job in seeking out potential consumers.
They are probably being reactionary, and waiting for consumers to come to them. If
we take the time to seek out consumers, we should be in a better position to avoid
that scenario. On top of that, how many projects get completed in two months? If
there were any, I wasn't involved in any of them."
Raj replied, "Yes, that's a good point. So, it sounds like three might be our magic
number. Consumers wouldn't immediately have to jump to the new release, but
they'd have at least one additional release cycle to acquire funding and staff to make
the necessary changes."
Ron added, "I think we can live with this, but the one thing I want to be sure of is
that changes aren't done in a vacuum. Just because there's a policy of three versions
doesn't mean that all changes should be discussed with all existing consumers and
new prospective consumers prior to committing to a release."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Service Versioning
[ 82 ]
Spencer said, "Good point, Ron. If we don't communicate with each other, we're
leaving ourselves open to problems and dealing with ‘he said/she said' scenarios."
With this caveat, everyone agreed that three supported versions was a good starting
point. They all also agreed that the inconsistency in release schedules of applications
could become a problem in the future. All of the members of the Center of Excellence
knew of at least one application that was still in use in production, yet hadn't been
modified in at least five years.
Spencer made sure he discussed this with Elena when he followed up with her the
policy of three supported versions in production at one time. Elena and Spencer both
agreed that having applications in use for over five years without anyone touching
them was actually risky for the company, since all knowledge of the system could
be lost to technology changes, personnel turnover, or other reasons. By keeping the
policy at three supported versions of each service, it would encourage Advasco to
review and, if necessary, refresh the systems on a more frequent basis, mitigating
any risk associated with these long tenured applications.
Service Versioning Policies
In this chapter, Advasco runs into the challenge of modifying an existing service.
While the initial version of a service is typically developed in lock step with one or
more consumers, the hopes for synchronized schedules quickly fade away when
a service has two or more consumers. As shown in the narrative, there are many
different ways of addressing this challenge. What is consistent, however, is that the
SOA governance effort must establish policies that are consistent with the behavior
desired for the company's SOA efforts.
For at least two of the options presented in Spencer's original decision-making
meeting for the Customer Information Service, attendees stated that a particular
option would undermine the goals of the SOA effort. One option called for the
annuity team to simply write their own version of the service that they would use.
This went against the goal of having no two systems implementing the same logic.
It also went against the goal of having a single owner for each service capability.
Another option called for the service team to maintain an arbitrary number of service
implementations. While this went along with the single ownership policy, it still
ended up with multiple implementations of the same logic.
We were also presented with potentially conflicting goals. Having multiple versions
of the service owned by a single team results in multiple implementations, but
having a single implementation that was slow and difficult to change would go
against the goals of agility for the organization. In the end, the Center of Excellence
recognized that agility was the more important goal, and as long as the number of
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 4
[ 83 ]
versions was kept to a small number, the associated overhead on the service team
was worth it.
This example demonstrates a very important point. While an organization may
initially set some very high level goals and behaviors, such as decreasing the time
required to deliver new business capabilities by 10%, these goals must trickle down
to finer-grained policies such as the number of services that will be maintained
in production.
Explicit or Implicit Versioning
When defining service versioning policies, one thing that must be considered is
whether or not consumers are required to explicitly specify the version of a service
that they will use or not. For example, when using a service that is accessed via
HTTP, the service invocation must specify a URL. This applies whether the service
requires a SOAP envelope or if the service is using a resource model provided via
REST URLs. For Advasco, a URL used internally for a service will look like this:
http://services.advasco.com/BooksRecords/Customer
In this example, there is no explicit version number associated with the URL. All we
can infer is that the request is directed at the host named services.advasco.com
for a service at the path of /BooksRecords/Customer. In the case of Advasco, a URL
naming standard enforced at a design checkpoint requires that the first portion of
the path expresses the domain of the service, in this example, BooksRecords, while
the second portion of the path expresses the service desired within the domain, in
this example, Customer. If there were multiple versions of this service available,
the version required for the request must be determined according to the identity
associated with the request. Identity is normally passed through transport headers
associated with the HTTP transport, or as part of the message itself. In the case
of SOAP-based services, the message can contain both header elements and the
message body. The WS-Security specification defines a standard location in the
SOAP header for security credentials. For example, a SOAP request for a Customer
Information Service may look like this:
<soap:Envelope xmlns:soap="http://schemas.xmlsoap.org/soap/
envelope/" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
xmlns:s="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xmlns:tns="http://www.
advasco.com/books-records/customer/nov-2008/">
 <soap:Body>
 <tns:GetCustomer>
 <tns:customer-id>abc123</tns:customer-id>
 </tns:GetCustomer>
 </soap:Body>
</soap:Envelope>
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Service Versioning
[ 84 ]
In this example, the namespace element of the message is http://schemas.
advasco.com/books-records/customer/nov-2008/. At the end of the URI for the
namespace, there is a month and date that can tell the recipient of the message that
the schema used in this message corresponds to the November 2008 version of the
Customer schema. It is entirely possible that even the namespace of the message may
not contain an explicit version identifier; however, the version of the message can be
determined by looking for the inclusion, or exclusion, of specific message elements.
Another example of a SOAP request could be the following:
<soap:Envelope xmlns:soap="http://schemas.xmlsoap.org/soap/envelope/"
xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xmlns:s="http://
www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xmlns:tns="http://www.advasco.com/">
 <soap:Header>
 <wsse:Security xmlns:wsse="http://docs.oasis-open.org/wss/2004/01/
oasis-200401-wss-wssecurity-secext-1.0.xsd">
 <wsu:Timestamp xmlns:wsu="http://docs.oasis-open.org/wss/2004/01/
oasis-200401-wss-wssecurity-utility-1.0.xsd" wsu:Id="Timestampaaddaaf5-1207-44d7-a5ab-64b6bf5f678e">
 <wsu:Created>2008-05-27T21:23:25Z</wsu:Created>
 </wsu:Timestamp>
 <wsse:UsernameToken xmlns:wsu="http://docs.oasis-open.org/
wss/2004/01/oasis-200401-wss-wssecurity-utility-1.0.xsd" wsu:
Id="SecurityToken-53f28e17-d945-4966-aef1-3ab95e680721">
 <wsse:Username>jdoe</wsse:Username>
 <wsse:Password Type="http://docs.oasis-open.org/wss/2004/01/oasis200401-wss-username-token-profile-1.0#PasswordDigest">2gy4KlZvottIW989
aDMD6JTL/Mk=</wsse:Password>
 <wsse:Nonce>EqJ39Y6g6V+X9XgLIwx1Wg==</wsse:Nonce>
 <wsu:Created>2008-05-27T21:23:25Z</wsu:Created>
 </wsse:UsernameToken>
 </wsse:Security>
 </soap:Header>
 <soap:Body>
 <tns:GetCustomer>
 <tns:customer-id>abc123</tns:customer-id>
 </tns:GetCustomer>
 </soap:Body>
</soap:Envelope>
In this example, neither the URL for the request nor the XML namespace gives any
indication of the version of the service desired. The only thing this message has is
the identity of the consumer. This example uses the WS-Security UsernameToken
profile and specifies a username of jdoe. Through the use of a service contract, this
consumer can now be associated with a particular version of the service via policies.
An intermediary can receive the message, check the policies associated with the
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 4
[ 85 ]
contract for this consumer, and then either route to the appropriate endpoint or
apply transformations to preserve backward compatibility.
Extending the Service Contract
In Chapter 2, we introduced the service contract, which is an explicit representation
of the relationship between a consumer and a provider. The contract initially focused
on providing a functional interface, along with a delivery schedule, if the service
did not exist yet. However, there is much more to the service contract. The contract
needs to also specify the policies that govern the run-time behavior of the service. In
the example in this chapter, two run-time policies are required to enable the behavior
that was described. The first is that the request needed to contain appropriate
credentials to identify the source of the request. The second is that the request needs
to be routed to a specific version of the service. While this may not seem important
with the initial service implementation and its consumers, as soon as the next
consumer comes along and requires a modification, as was the case in our example,
this policy becomes very important.
Policy-Driven Infrastructure
One reason for the formalization of the service contract is to allow the infrastructure
to easily enforce the policies. First made popular in the context of web access
management solutions, policy-driven infrastructure has four primary components as
shown in the following figure:
Policy Decision Point
Policy Management Point
Policy Information Point
Policy Enforcement Point
The first component is the policy management point, also known as the policy
administration point. This is where the administrator would enter the policies
associated with the service contract. The policy management point would also
be the place where management services would be exposed for data center
automation opportunities.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Service Versioning
[ 86 ]
The second component is the policy information point. This is the backing
repository where policies entered via the policy management point are stored. When
applied to SOA, the Service Registry/Repository can play the role of the policy
information point.
Moving into the actual run-time path of requests, the third component is the policy
enforcement point. This is where requests are intercepted and any applicable policies
are enforced.
The final component, which is frequently co-located with the policy enforcement
point, is the policy decision point. This is where the decision is taken on what to do
when enforcing each policy.
To understand the relationship between a policy enforcement point and a policy
decision point, consider a real world example. If you are driving a car and reach an
intersection with traffic signals, you are at the policy enforcement point. All cars
must pay attention to the state of the traffic signal to determine whether they can
proceed in their desired direction or not. The traffic signal itself is the policy decision
point. Based upon embedded sensors in the street or timers, the light is either red,
amber, or green, which represents the decision on how to handle traffic from each
direction. In this example, the policy enforcement point and the policy decision point
are co-located.
Now, suppose you have driven your car to the entrance of a gated community. The
gate, however, is unmanned. Instead, there is either a video camera or an intercom
at the gate. The gate represents the policy enforcement point. The policy decision
point, however, is not at the gate. The policy decision point is wherever the security
personnel is sitting watching the feed from the camera or listening to the audio from
the intercom.
Putting this in the context of our versioning example, a request from a service
consumer would be intercepted by the policy enforcement point. The policy
enforcement point would extract the message content, and hand it off to a policy
decision point. The policy decision point would examine all applicable policies for
the service requested from the policy information point. There will be some policies
that are universally applied, such as requiring that some form of identity be on all
service requests. From that point, the identity can be authenticated and authorized,
according to the policies in the service contract. Once identity is established, policies
that may be specific to the service contract between the specific consumer associated
with the identity provided and the service being requested can be enforced, such
as what version of the service should receive the request, and whether any of the
transformations will be applied. All of these policies should already be in the policy
information point as a result of previous actions by an administrator via the policy
management point.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 4
[ 87 ]
Mapping this conceptual approach to the actual infrastructure associated with your
SOA efforts typically takes one of the following two forms, or a combination of
the two.
Service Gateway (PEP, PDP)
User
Directory
Policy
Cache
(PIP)
Policy
Store
(PIP)
Service Gateway
Console (PMP)
Service Consumer
Service Provider
This model is a gateway-based approach (or brokered gateway pattern). A service
consumer never interacts directly with a service provider; rather the request is first
directed through a gateway that is responsible for policy enforcement and policy
decisions. More often than not, the gateway also maintains a cache of policies locally
to avoid having to establish a connection with the policy management point for
every service request. The management console for the service gateway is the policy
management point. This will include some form of backing stores for the policies.
User
Directory
Policy
Cache
(PIP)
Policy
Store
(PIP)
Service Gateway
Console (PMP)
Service Consumer
Service Provider
Policy Agent (PEP, PDP)
In this agent-based model, an agent is deployed on the service provider platform.
This agent is typically configured as part of the platform configuration and not as
part of the actual service. The agent plays the exact same role as a service gateway,
with the only difference being that it performs its logic in the same execution thread
as the actual service, should the policies allow the request to be processed.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Service Versioning
[ 88 ]
While these two diagrams represent two common approaches, individual vendor
products in this space can take different architectural approaches. Some may
externalize the policy decision point, changing the role of the cache to be a decision
cache, rather than a policy cache. Some may utilize a service registry/repository for
the policy store; others may require the use of a dedicated database. Some products
may include both gateways and agents, and some may even include consumer-side
agents in addition to the more typical provider-side agents.
Applying Policy
In order to enforce the two policies mentioned earlier, which were:
1. All requests must contain appropriate credentials to identify the source of
the request.
2. Based on the source identified, requests must be routed to the appropriate
version of the service.
the basic operations would be:
1. In the policy management point, configure a policy for the service endpoint
that applies to all consumers which states that only requests that contain
credentials in the format desired will be allowed. Any request that does
not contain credentials, or contains credentials in the wrong format will be
rejected.
2. In the policy management point, for each authorized consumer, define
a policy that routes the request to the appropriate endpoint or applies
appropriate transformations to the incoming request and outgoing response.
The policy enforcement approach can be thought of as a pipeline of decisions,
ultimately resulting in a rejection of the request or the correct routing to the
appropriate endpoint. Visually depicted, it looks like this:
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 4
[ 89 ]
Policy Enforcement Point
Policy Decision Point
Policy Cache
Extract
Credentials
Return
Fault
Failed
Succeed
If Consumer A If Consumer B If Consumer C
Transform
Request
Route Request Route Request Route Request
Service Version 3
Service Provider
Service Version 2
Service Provider
There are a number of different categories of vendor products that are capable of
providing this concept of policy driven infrastructure, providing a platform for the
implementation of the policy pipeline as seen in the preceding figure.
Enterprise Service Bus
Perhaps the most common of the categories, the Enterprise Service Bus, or ESB, is
considered by many to be "the technology" associated with SOA adoption. In reality,
an ESB is just one way of providing the capabilities associated with consumers
and providers.
There is no standard architecture for an ESB. Some vendors use a gateway-based
approach exclusively, others are exclusively agent-based architecture, and others
provide both. The one common thing in all of them is that the ESB represents the
policy enforcement point. Enterprises that have adopted ESB technologies typically
require that all requests go through it, and take measures to ensure that requests
which are not sent through the ESB are not allowed.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Service Versioning
[ 90 ]
The biggest risk that an organization may face with an ESB is that many of these
products are targeted at developers. As a result, the separation of policies, or even
the notion of a policy itself, may not be as clear as with other solutions. This will
certainly vary by vendor; therefore, an analysis of the conceptual model of the
product should be part of your evaluation process.
XML Appliances
A second category of products that can provide this policy-driven infrastructure is
XML appliances. These products primarily started in the XML acceleration space,
expanded into perimeter security for XML over HTTP transactions, and now
provide broader capabilities for additional policy domains associated with service
connectivity. Some vendors are now marketing their appliances as ESBs.
Being appliances, these products typically adhere to a gateway-based model,
although some of the vendors in this space create appliances by placing software on
a commodity hardware platform. Those that have taken this approach may have the
ability to repackage the software for installation as an agent.
The XML appliances are less likely to have a developer-centric operating model.
They are more likely to present an operational model that is targeted towards an
operations team rather than a development team, although just as with ESBs, there is
significant variability from vendor to vendor.
Service Management Platforms
The next category of products in the space of policy-driven infrastructure is the
service management platform. Unlike the typical systems management product,
which normally observes system behavior in the background, products in the service
management space take a more active role. In addition to collecting metrics about
service invocations, they can also intercept requests and enforce policies associated
with those invocations.
Service management products from the major vendors in the space will include
both gateways and agents, as well as agents for other gateways, such as ESBs or
XML appliances, as if this space wasn't confusing enough. A key difference between
service management platforms, ESBs, and XML appliances is typically in the policy
domains supported. For all of these products, the policy domains usually
include ones focused on individual requests, such as security, but where the
service management platforms really shine is in policies that apply across multiple
requests, or policies that are consumer-based, rather than service-based. For
example, service management platforms will typically be able to enforce a policy
that mandates notifications whenever the average response time for a specific time
period exceeds a particular threshold. Taking this concept a step further, a service
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 4
[ 91 ]
management platform should also be able to apply different thresholds for different
consumers. Beyond policy enforcement, service management platforms also include
advanced capabilities in collecting metrics on service traffic, along with sophisticated
dashboards, reports, and analytics capabilities on those metrics. In contrast, a service
management platform may not have as sophisticated routing capabilities of an ESB
or the raw performance or threat protection capabilities of an XML appliance.
Service Invocation and Exposure Frameworks
The final category that must be included is frameworks, specifically service
invocation and exposure frameworks. As mentioned earlier, a gateway is not
required to implement policy-driven infrastructure. A service invocation framework
can be used to intercept outgoing requests and perform policy enforcement and
decision-making, and a service exposure framework can be used to intercept
incoming requests and perform policy enforcement and decision-making. For
example, in the domain of security policies, a service exposure framework such
as .NET and Windows Communication Foundation or Java EE and JAX-WS,
allow security policies to be specified in an external file from the actual service
implementation code.
Many of these frameworks have also extended the normal WSDL (Web Services
Description Language) to specify policies for using the service, such as what type of
security credentials are required. These policies are normally specified using the
WS-Policy framework, but beyond security (WS-SecurityPolicy), and reliable
messaging (WS-ReliableMessagingPolicy), additional standards for specifying
policies have not been created. By including these policies within a WSDL document,
a consumer can ensure the messages they send are compliant with what the
provider expects.
The primary drawback to utilizing frameworks, and also common to an exclusively
agent-based approach, is that it limits the domains of policies that can be enforced.
In this chapter, the key focus was service versioning. This is an area where a
framework-based approach may be insufficient. The reason is that by the time we
reach the policy enforcement point, we are already executing a particular version of
the service. At that point, it is too late to redirect the request to a different version,
unless the versioning logic is coded into the service itself. Agents may have a bit
more flexibility in this area, but if the versions aren't running in the same application
server or application server cluster, there may still be challenges.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Service Versioning
[ 92 ]
Conceptual View
While not required, it is possible to combine all of these elements into a single view.
XML appliances, with their advanced security capabilities, excel at the perimeter,
ESBs with their mediation and routing capabilities can act as a centralized broker,
and Web Service Management agents can be leveraged throughout. Combined
with the core Web Services and XML support provided by a framework yields the
following conceptual view. Policy enforcement and decision points are labeled with
PEP/PDP, policy information points are labeled with PIP, and policy management
points are labeled with PMP.
External Service Consumer
Perimeter XML Appliance (PEP, PDP)
Service
Registry/
Repository
(PIP)
Enterprise Service Bus
(PEP, PDP)
Internal Service Consumer
Service Invocation Framework
(PEP, PDP)
Outgoing Service Management
Agent (PEP, PDP)
ESB Management Console, XML Appliance Console, Service
Management Console (PMP)
Service Management
Agent (PEP, PDP)
Incoming Service Management
Agent (PEP, PDP)
Service Exposure Framework
(PEP, PDP)
Service Provider
Service Lifecycle Management
The ability to enforce policies at run time is very important to SOA. In our example,
the need to do this was introduced when the Center of Excellence determined
that organizations managing the service must support up to three versions in
production. Keeping in line with the definition of governance, the Center of
Excellence recognized that the desired behavior was to support the changing needs
of consumers while not overburdening the team providing the service. Remember,
however, that governance is about people, policies, and process. In this case, the
policy exists, but to ensure things are successful, appropriate processes must be put
in place. This process is service lifecycle management.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 4
[ 93 ]
Consider how our example could get worse, despite the policy that was put in
place by the Center of Excellence. There were several assumptions that were made
by the Center of Excellence in coming up with the policy, largely around the
frequency of changes that would be necessary for a service, or a consumer. As an
organization embraces SOA, the number of interdependencies between systems
will increase. Previously, organizations may have only updated applications every
12 to 18 months, and those updates were self-contained to the application itself.
Now, due to the increased number of interdependencies, those updates may involve
other components outside of the application's direct control. Look across many
applications, and the possibility exists that a service gets one request for a change
every month for four months straight, and then a period of no changes for
several months.
In order to mitigate this, an organization must change the way that these changes are
managed. As a point of comparison, let's look at the interaction that organizations
have with their technology vendors. When an organization runs into a bug, or
requests a new feature, it normally isn't delivered on its own. Rather, the vendor
maps the feature request to their release schedule, and delivers it as part of a
collection of features and bug fixes that were requested by a variety of customers. If
an organization doesn't adopt a similar approach for its internal development efforts,
they run a risk of being crippled by the interdependencies that were intended to
increase agility, not stifle it.
Service lifecycle management takes a product management approach to services.
Rather than viewing service development as a project that ends when the service is
placed into production, the lifecycle of a service needs to be viewed as a process of
continual change and improvements, each one occurring through a managed release.
This can be a difficult concept to grasp when an organization is used to thinking only
in terms of projects.
The typical project, when viewed in the large sense, involves an analysis and
definition phase that refines the scope of the effort, a design and development phase,
a testing and debugging phase, and finally, deployment into production. The project
begins when funding is approved, and ends when the solution is deployed into
production and accepted by the sponsors. This effort is linear, with a clear beginning
and end, as shown here.
Project Definition Design &
Development Testing Deployment
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Service Versioning
[ 94 ]
Interestingly, the project does not include any effort to monitor and manage the
solution after it goes into the production. While the project may put these processes
in place, if there are changes required based upon production monitoring, the project
team is no longer in place to address it. A support team may exist, but these teams
are normally focused on bug fixes and troubleshooting, at most. The resources that
are needed to make incremental changes are more than likely assigned to
new efforts.
A product management-based approach no longer views things in terms of a
single linear effort with a clear beginning and end. Rather than being based on the
project, the lifecycle is based on the product. The lifecycle begins when the need
for version one is identified and funded, and ends when the last remaining version
is decommissioned from production. In between those two events, there are any
number of releases, each having the characteristics of the typical project: analysis and
definition, design and development, testing, and deployment. The missing elements
that tie it all together are the three M's: monitoring, management, and marketing as
shown in the following figure:
Release
Definition
Design and
Development
Decommissioning
Monitoring,
Management,
& Marketing
Testing and
Deployment
Service
Provider
Identification
These three M's are critical to getting out of the habit of linear projects and into the
world of product management.
Monitoring
The first of the three M's is monitoring. Clearly, most organizations have monitoring
in place. Normally, this monitoring is focused on up/down behavior. Is the
solution up and running, or is something wrong that needs to be fixed? This type
of monitoring is very reactionary, and solely concerned with the behavior when
something goes wrong, and not at all concerned with the behavior when things are
running normally. When performing service monitoring, the focus needs to shift
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 4
[ 95 ]
from the internal operations of the service to an external viewpoint on the behavior
of the service. What is the response time being seen by consumers? How does the
response time vary during the day? How is the response time changing over a week,
a month, or several months? By observing the behavior when things are working
normally, a service manager can take a very proactive approach, not only to problem
detection and resolution, but also to anticipating future needs.
Management
The second M is management. Monitoring of the service is typically an activity only
performed by the service provider. In order to truly be proactive, a service manager
must take that information and discuss it with their service consumers. If the
monitoring indicates some level of unusual behavior, be it a slow, but steady increase
in response time, or anomalies in usage patterns, the service manager must discuss
it with the consumers to determine the root cause. It is in these discussions that new
feature requests may arise, changes being made to the existing interface in order
to better support the usage patterns, or even changes being made to the consumer,
based upon the observations that have been made.
Marketing
The final M is marketing. Management is focused on existing consumers. Marketing
is focused on new consumers. Many organizations take a "build it and they will
come" approach, and all too often find out that nobody comes. While governance
certainly plays a role in trying to ensure that projects find the services that they
need for their solution, service providers should not rely solely on governance for
finding new consumers. A service manager must take an active role in marketing the
capabilities available. Back in Chapter 2, Spencer did this, albeit unsuccessfully, for
the Customer Information Service. In the end, this effort paid off because Ramesh
came back to Spencer when an opportunity to leverage the service presented
itself again.
As these activities continue, the service manager can now begin forming plans for
the next release in a proactive manner, rather than waiting to begin the cycle until
the next consumer comes along and requests it. If a service manager is successful in
these efforts, they can begin to plan out scheduled releases on a regular basis. This
is the key to effective version management. If consumers know that a new release
will be produced and deployed every six months, they can plan their own releases
around that effort. If, instead, releases occur on an ad hoc basis, it is far more difficult
for an existing consumer to respond to those changes.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Service Versioning
[ 96 ]
Summary
In this chapter, Advasco was faced with the challenge of service versioning. A new
consumer had requested some changes to the Customer Information Service, but the
existing consumers could not accommodate the changes necessary in the timeframe
required. Led by the SOA Center of Excellence, a decision-making process was used
to determine the best course of action, which was to support both the old interface
and the new interface, either by deploying two versions of the service, or leveraging
transformations in the middle to ensure backward compatibility.
While this solved the situation for the Customer Information Service, the CIO was
concerned that this would not be the end of the versioning debate. The Center of
Excellence debated this and introduced a policy that balanced the needs of the
service consumers with the needs of the team providing the service. The policy was
to support up to three versions of a service in production.
Service versioning is a very important issue for an enterprise to deal with in order to
achieve the agility goals desired. If policies are not established, contention will arise.
It can be between individual consumers of the same service, or between consumers
and the service provider.
The need to support multiple versions also introduces the role of policy-driven
infrastructure in a run-time environment. If multiple versions of the service are
deployed simultaneously, there must be a mechanism for routing requests from
specific consumers to specific versions of the service. The version desired could be
explicitly specified as part of the request, or the service contract can be used to define
a policy that can be implicitly enforced by the run-time infrastructure.
Policy-driven infrastructure has four key components. First, a policy management
point allows policies to be administered. Second, a policy information point allows
policies to be stored and retrieved. Third, a policy enforcement point exists in the
run-time path of the request, intercepting it to allow policies to be enforced. Finally,
a policy decision point is where decisions are made based upon the message content
and the policies that are applicable to the interchange at hand.
Examples of policy-driven infrastructure include the ESB, XML appliances, service
management platforms, and service frameworks.
However, policies and infrastructure alone may not allow versions to be easily
managed. By changing the culture of the organization from one that deals with
change on an ad hoc basis to one that anticipates change, versioning can be managed
much easier.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 4
[ 97 ]
Organizations today typically provide technology capabilities through the use
of projects. A project lifecycle has a clear beginning and end, but the solutions
produced by those projects do not. This creates a mismatch when a solution needs to
change, because a new project with potentially new staff must be justified, funded,
and completed.
An alternative to the typical project-based thinking is to embrace service lifecycle
management. Service lifecycle management encourages service teams to view their
service as a continual sequence of refinements, with the lifecycle rooted not in the
project timeline, but the service's timeline. It begins when version 1 is approved and
funded, and ends when the last remaining version of the service is decommissioned
from production. The key difference in this approach is between the time a service is
deployed into production and the time the next release begins, the service team must
focus on monitoring, management, and marketing. Monitoring records the behavior
of the system, beyond simple up/down monitoring, management utilizes the data
collected by the monitors to increase the understanding of the system behavior by
both the service provider and the service consumers. Marketing is focused on finding
new consumers in a proactive manner, rather than relying solely on the staff of new
projects to properly search the service registry and repository.
By practicing good service lifecycle management, a service team can determine the
appropriate timeframe for its releases. Just as enterprises prefer when their major
technology vendors provide updates on a regular basis, so should an enterprise's
internal service providers schedule their updates. By providing new versions on a
regular basis, there will be no surprises for the existing consumers when changes
are announced.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing the
Analysis Process
The previous chapters have focused on answering the question; "How do I build
services the right way?" That's only a part of the SOA equation. Another equally
important, if not more important, question is; "How do I build the right services?"
This chapter will present what happens at Advasco when their efforts begin to
stagnate due to challenges in determining the "right" services, and discuss techniques
and artifacts that can be used in governance of the analysis process.
Building the Right Services
The enterprise architecture team had gathered for their regular meeting. After
covering the administrative material, Elena asked Spencer for an update from the
SOA Center of Excellence. Unfortunately, Spencer's news wasn't as positive as she
had hoped.
"Well, to be honest, I feel like our progress has stagnated a bit. While we're still
staying busy with many of our education efforts, especially around Service Lifecycle
Management, it still doesn't feel like we've reached the tipping point on our projects
where we're seeing a lot more composition and reuse. In fact, it seems that we have
a mad scramble at the beginning of every project to make adjustments to the services
that they need, get new services created, and so on. While the architects are doing all
the right things in identifying the needs early, and getting the right groups involved,
it still feels like we're doing everything just-in-time," said Spencer.
He continued, "Another thing that concerns me is the number of changes that have
been made to some of the services. While we've been able to handle the version
changes, some of the services have had pretty dramatic changes in scope from their
original version."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing the Analysis Process
[ 100 ]
Elena asked, "Didn't those service teams seek out other consumers when they were
first developed?"
Spencer answered, "Largely, yes. Some of them didn't seek them out properly until
their second version, as they were created while the Center of Excellence was just
getting formed."
"That is troubling. Do me a favor and make sure you personally review the next
project that encounters this same just-in-time behavior and see if you can determine
what the root cause is."
It didn't take long before Spencer had his opportunity. The very next project that
came along set in course the just-in-time behavior that he had just described to Elena.
This project was from the Brokerage Systems division. The project architect had done
his work properly in building a candidate architecture. It called for several services,
some of them new, while others were existing services identified from the repository.
The collection of services certainly covered the needs of the project sufficiently. One
of the new services that the architect identified was a portfolio proposal service. The
project team entered into discussions with the Center of Excellence to determine the
appropriate owner for this service. This is where things got complicated.
Jared, a lead analyst from the Brokerage Systems division and member of the COE,
reviewed the proposed architecture and felt that the portfolio proposal service
shouldn't be a new service. He asked Alan, the project architect for the new system,
about this. "Alan, I see that one of the services you're going to need is a portfolio
proposal service. Had you considered talking with the team that currently provides
the portfolio management service about this?"
Alan replied, "We did see that service in the repository, but when we looked into it,
it was clear that the service focused on operations that dealt with real portfolios, not
proposed portfolios."
Jared said, "Did you discuss it with Jim, the service manager for it?"
Alan responded, "Well, no, because it was pretty clear that it didn't provide anything
that we currently needed."
"Well, before we rule this option out, let's get together with Jim and discuss it. At a
minimum, there's a good chance that Jim's going to be involved one way or another,
since I don't think the project team is the appropriate owner for this service."
Jared and Alan met later on in the week with Jim, the service manager for the
portfolio management service. Jared kicked off the meeting. "Jim, we wanted to get
together with you to discuss the needs of the new system on which Alan is working.
Alan, can you go over the new service you identified?"
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 5
[ 101 ]
"Sure," Alan replied. "One of the services we need is a portfolio proposal service.
This application is focused on the sales process. As a result, it's only dealing with
prospective customers, and not any real clients. Our financial consultants will
be putting together proposals for these prospects based upon whatever existing
holdings they choose to disclose. We saw that you had a portfolio management
service available, but it appears that it only deals with actual portfolios held by
current clients."
Jim replied, "Yes, that's true. To be honest, we've never even thought about adding
proposal capabilities to the service, and you're the first person to even ask about it."
Jared replied, "So what do you think? To me, it makes sense to incorporate the
proposal capabilities into the existing portfolio management service. For many
clients, the portfolio lifecycle begins with the proposal to a prospect, not when the
prospect becomes a client and transfers their holdings. If we want to keep things
aligned with the business definition of a portfolio, I think that's the way to go."
Jim said, "It's hard to argue with your logic, but just understand that incorporating
in the notion of a prospect and a proposal represents a pretty big change to the way
the service is currently designed. Everything is driven off the existing holdings
and customer tables. As far as I know, those databases aren't capable of storing
information about prospects and proposals."
Jared could see where Jim was going with this, knowing that his team would be
hard-pressed to deliver this service in the timeframe needed by Alan, even without
considering the impact to existing consumers. It was apparent that Alan felt the
same way, as he had a look of concern on his face. Despite that, Jared said, "Jim, let's
assume for a second that we treat this as a separate service. Given the domain of
functionality, it's very likely that it's going to be assigned to your team anyway. We
can see what we can do about providing some additional resources to your team for
the effort, but ultimately, I think the decision is up to you and whether you want to
manage an additional service or incorporate this capability into the existing portfolio
management service. The business is really focused on growing the investment
business and drawing customers away from our competitors, so I think we're going
to see more and more requests for proposal capabilities with a desire to move the
data easily into a live portfolio once we get their business."
Jim thought about this and agreed. "I think you're right Jared. Alan, let's schedule a
detailed discussion on the capabilities you're looking for and get the ball rolling on it.
However, I can't guarantee that we're going to meet your schedule needs. We have
five existing customers for the portfolio management service, and they're going to
need to perform regression testing on any changes that we make."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing the Analysis Process
[ 102 ]
Alan said, "Well, let's have the discussions and see where we're at. I had already
talked to our project manager about adding resources to handle the development
of this service, so perhaps I can have them work with you and minimize the
schedule impact."
Jim and Alan got together with their teams and hashed out the details of the effort.
It became clear that Alan's project would necessitate extending the schedule by
six weeks in order to accommodate the work associated with the portfolio service.
In addition to Alan's project, two of the five existing consumers also had plans to
incorporate proposal capabilities into their systems, so their requirements needed to
be factored in as well.
Jared brought this news back to Spencer and the Center of Excellence at their next
meeting. Spencer asked the obvious question, "How did we miss all of this back
when we created the original portfolio management service? Didn't Jim's team seek
out the existing consumers beyond the initial project?"
Jared replied, "Yes, he did, but as he told us, that subject never came up. My
suspicion is that the conversation began with a focus on portfolio management
capabilities for existing customers with existing portfolios, and directed the thinking
from there. No one ever stopped to think about proposals and prospects. So, there
really wasn't anything that anyone did wrong on the project, given the context that
they had. The only thing I can say is that if they had a different context going in, such
as additional domain knowledge of how portfolios work in the business, perhaps
these opportunities would have been identified earlier."
Later that day, Spencer met with Elena and briefed her on the situation. Elena asked,
"How widely has the schedule slip been communicated? I'm concerned that this is
becoming a trend. I've heard at least two other projects that have encountered similar
slips in their schedule, even though it seems like we're doing all the right things as
far as SOA is concerned."
Spencer replied, "I'm not sure who's aware of it outside of the project manager."
Elena soon found out that many people were aware of the problem, including
Andrea. In their next one-on-one meeting, Andrea asked, "Elena, are you aware of
the schedule slips we've had recently?"
She replied, "Yes, Spencer had just briefed me on the latest one, a six-week slip
associated with the work that's needed to modify the portfolio management service.
I've had the COE look at it, and they've struggled to identify the root cause. The
project teams and the service managers have all been following our directions to
the letter. The only common thread is that all of the services that have required
significant rework have been due to additional capabilities being added that weren't
originally included or ever known."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 5
[ 103 ]
Andrea replied, "I know you've got a great group of people on your COE, but why
don't you pull in some of the leading service managers that have experienced this
first hand and see what they have to say."
Elena replied, "I'll get right on it."
Two days later, Elena sat with six key service managers including Jim, manager of
the Portfolio Management service, and Maria, manager of the Customer service.
Elena said to the managers, "We're here to determine why all of your services have
encountered very significant changes over their lifetime. I fully expect that your
services will change, but you've all had some large addition of capabilities that
weren't part of the original design, despite actively seeking out new consumers."
Jim said, "You've got that right. We went from having a service focused on retrieval
and updates to existing customer portfolios to having to support prospective
customers and portfolio proposals for both prospects and existing consumers. This
was something that no one on our team or any of our previous consumers had even
discussed, and now the project that needs it has been delayed by six weeks."
Maria added, "I've had similar problems, and have been thinking about it ever since
I heard about the situation from Jim. In all of our cases, it made sense for the new
capabilities to be folded into our services, but there were also other things that we
had never thought about. When I think about what could have changed, it would
have required some project at the time to have a different scope that would have
caused us to think differently. To be honest, my team first thinks about the consumer
at hand, and then takes the proposed service to others, using the initial consumer as
a point of comparison."
Elena replied, "I like where you're going with this Maria, please continue."
"Well, what happens when we do this is that we bias the conversation towards
the capabilities we know. As a result, the project teams aren't thinking about what
capabilities they need, they're thinking about the service and whether or not the
functionality it offers is something they could use, rather than coming to the table
with an existing need. In other words, we're constrained by the analysis efforts
of the projects at hand. Nowhere do we do any kind of analysis that goes beyond
the known project. When we talk with other projects, we immediately steer the
conversation towards a validation of the known capabilities rather than allowing the
project to identify what they might need first."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing the Analysis Process
[ 104 ]
Jim added, "I think I can simplify this even more. How do we know the services
we're building are the right services not just for the project and the other initial
consumers, but for the enterprise? Today everything begins from the scope defined
by that initial project, which puts up some artificial barriers, even when talking to
consumers outside of that project."
Mark, another manager, asked, "It sounds like we need a better way of doing
analysis. Can't we leverage some of the new business process analysis and modeling
techniques? Everything I've read about it seems to indicate that it looks across
applications, rather than within one."
Elena responded directly to Mark's suggestion, "Mark, you're right that the business
process analysis is a different way of looking at things and can provide some benefit.
The problem, however, is that our business process efforts are all also tied to projects.
Our first experience with it showed that we merely moved the risk. Let me draw
a picture for you to illustrate what I mean. If we look at where we were with our
applications two or three years ago, we had a picture that looks like this:
Application
Service
Application
Service
Application
Service
Application
Service
"We had vertical application silos, each that may have had some services that were
very specific to them. What we've been working towards is more sharing of services
across applications, a picture that looks like this:
Application
Service Service
Application Application Application
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 5
[ 105 ]
"While we've made some progress towards making these services more broadly
acceptable, it seems to be happening just in time, and with more changes than we'd
like when we add a new consumer. Now, let's look at this from a business process
perspective. Business processes are viewed horizontally, going across applications,
so we now have a picture like this:
Service Service Service Service Business Process
Service Service Service Service Business Process
Service Service Service Service Business Process
"You can see that we don't automatically get sharing of services across multiple
business processes, simply by changing our perspective on things. We still have the
same problem, only rather than seeking out additional applications as consumers
after a service have been identified, we seek out additional business processes, so we
can hopefully get to a state like this:
Service Service Business Process
Service Service Business Process
Service
Service
Service Service Business Process
"In this state, we now have services that are shared across business processes. The
point of all of this is to show that taking a business process view doesn't necessarily
get us anywhere closer to the 'right' services on the first try. It merely changes our
question from 'What other applications are interested in this service?' to 'What other
business processes are interested in this?'"
Mark responded, "I see your point. Wouldn't having both a business process
viewpoint and an application viewpoint help things out?"
Elena said, "That's possible, and certainly better than not changing anything."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing the Analysis Process
[ 106 ]
Maria, who had been looking very pensive while Elena illustrated her concepts,
brought forward a suggestion. "You know, it seems the common element in both
of these is the constraints imposed by the project at hand. The application project
influences the service definition by the constraints of the application being built,
while a business process project influences according to the constraints of the
process. In both cases, we get a sub-optimal service. The more I think about this, the
more I think the answer to the problem lies in performing analysis outside of the
context of the project."
Mark had a very quizzical expression on his face. "I'm not clear on what you're trying
to say, Maria. Analysis is a core part of the project lifecycle. Are you suggesting that
projects shouldn't have an analysis phase?"
Maria replied, "No, there's always going to be analysis required to do a project. What
I'm thinking is that the projects need some analysis artifacts to guide them going into
the project."
Elena jumped into the conversation. "This sounds very similar to what we did in
technical architecture in the past, now applied to the functional analysis space. Mark,
maybe this will help. Ten years ago, Advasco didn't have an enterprise architecture
program. All technology decisions were made within projects, and they typically
picked whatever technology was going to be best for their needs. We realized
that we had several different projects that had purchased competing technologies
for virtually the same problem. For example, we had at least five different Java
application servers. Andrea formed the Enterprise Architecture team to help reduce
our technology footprint and establish standards for technology usage. Initially,
we had some success in consolidation, but we also ran into challenges when the
standard platform was insufficient. When that happened, it was a mad scramble
to get a solution in place. The way we solved that problem was to separate the
role of the project architect from the enterprise technology architect. The project
architects continued their focus on ensuring projects used technology in the ways
outlined by the standards, but the enterprise technology architects operated outside
of the context of any project. Their job is to continually watch what's going on in
the industry, review the efforts of the project architects and their successes and
failures, and with this, keep our enterprise technology architecture up to date. This
architecture is the tool that project architects use to know what the 'right' thing is.
Maria, if I'm getting you right, you're suggesting that what we focus on is an effort to
establish a similar architecture for our functional analysis efforts."
Maria responded, "That's exactly it! I was struggling with a way to describe it, but
you nailed it."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 5
[ 107 ]
Jim was not so eager. "Elena, while I agree that this would be a good thing, I don't
see a way that we can make this happen. It's hard enough to find decent analysts
for the projects in the queue, how are we possibly going to pull any of them away
to work on this effort? They'd have to be some of our best people to accomplish
what you suggest, and those are the people that are absolutely critical to our current
project efforts."
Elena replied, "I never said that this effort was going to be easy. We went through
similar struggles in the early days of Enterprise Architecture. I'll take it up with
Andrea and see if we can get the ball rolling. Thanks to all of you for this discussion.
I think we're on the right track with a potential solution to this, we just need to make
a convincing case."
The next week Elena met with Andrea to discuss the suggestion. Elena went over
with Andrea the conversation that she had had with the service managers. After
listening to Elena's recap, Andrea related that she had similar trepidations to Jim.
"Elena, I'm just not sure that we can afford to take the risk of pulling some of our
top analysts off project efforts. As you know, our funding comes from the revenues
of the firm, and they watch very closely on how much of the money allocated to IT
goes towards the delivery of business capabilities via projects, and how much is
consumed through non-project organizations like Enterprise Architecture."
Elena replied, "But at the same time, if we're still not delivering at the pace they'd
like, doesn't something need to change? If you remember back three years, our SOA
efforts were stagnant until we actually articulated the behavior we wanted, and
established policies to get us there. This is beginning to feel like the funding policies
of the business aren't matching the desired behavior they'd like to see."
Andrea said, "That's a good point, and I think we may have some leverage with it.
I also have another idea, though. What you are suggesting is needed is a functional
breakdown of the business, right? It's a business analysis activity, correct?"
"Yes, that's correct."
"Well, if that's the case, shouldn't the business be involved with that effort? The
business has a very different set of rules for how they fund their resources. A much
higher percentage of staff is not dedicated toward time-based project activities, and
besides, we're going to need their expertise. If they're committing some of their own
resources and have skin in the game, we may have an easier time justifying some of
our IT resources."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing the Analysis Process
[ 108 ]
"I would love to have some of the key business strategists involved in the
effort. The more we discuss this, the more I see that what we're describing is
business architecture. Just as we broke down the technology domain into shared
infrastructure and solution-specific components, we need to do the same thing with
the business capabilities."
Andrea replied, "I think that the term 'business architecture' will resonate much
better with my colleagues than 'functional reference architecture.' It doesn't sound
as technical, and the concept of shared capabilities versus specialized capabilities is
very easily described through sales and marketing examples. Why don't you take a
first pass at a presentation on this? I have a meeting with the right set of stakeholders
for this subject in two weeks. Do you think you can have a draft by the end of this
week? Then we can fine-tune it the following week."
Elena said, "I'll get right on it. Thanks for your willingness to let me run with this,
Andrea. As I mentioned, I really think this change is necessary to keep our efforts
going forward, and I'm glad you see it as well. I'll have that draft for you by midafternoon on Friday."
Elena developed the presentation, and Andrea was able to convince the business
stakeholders that this effort was necessary to keep, and even accelerate their
efforts in continuing to reduce their delivery times and improve their agility in
leveraging information technology.
Once approved, a team comprised of senior IT analysts, business strategists, business
analysts, and some facilitation from an outside firm that specialized in business
architecture development was formed. Within three months they were able to
generate their first artifacts that could be leveraged within some IT efforts, and after
six months, they had completed a draft architecture that covered all domains of
the business.
However, there was an unexpected outcome of this effort. After the domains of the
business had been identified, a new project went before the IT governance board
to request funding. This project, sponsored by the claims department, was striving
to modernize much of the claims process. Among the capabilities desired was the
ability to send payouts electronically to Advasco's customers. John, a key member
of the board, had been following the business domain modeling efforts. One of his
employees had been assigned to the business architecture efforts.
During the presentation, John asked the sponsor, "Have you met with the customer
account team about this proposal?"
The sponsor replied, "No, I haven't met with them yet."
John then asked, "How about the accounting team?"
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 5
[ 109 ]
The sponsor again replied, "No, I haven't. We've never had to do that before
requesting funding."
Andrea asked, "John, what are your concerns?"
John then replied, "Based upon our business architecture, it's clear to me that this
project is going to require interaction with at least the Customer and Account
services area as well as with Accounting for payouts. My concern is that these
groups may have significant work ahead of them to augment their services that this
solution may need. If they haven't been approached, we may have either funding or
scheduling issues down the road."
Around the table, heads could be seen nodding up and down. After some discussion,
it was agreed that the proposed project should review the new business architecture
models and engage the appropriate groups that would be involved in the solution.
As a result, the effort was split into multiple, independent efforts. The schedule
was adjusted to coincide with the normal release schedule of the services needed,
minimizing the disruption to existing consumers. Funding was appropriately
distributed across each of the efforts in a subsequent meeting, and the IT governance
group all agreed that they had a much higher level of confidence that the effort
would be successful.
Analysis for SOA
In this chapter, Advasco focused on the analysis side of SOA. While much of the
conversation around SOA focuses on technology, it's the analysis effort that actually
defines the service. Standard service implementation technologies are a key part of
SOA governance, as described in Chapter 2, but when an organization adopts SOA,
a very common question is, "How do we build the right services?" While there are
certainly incremental gains that can be obtained by standardizing the technologies
used to build services, this does not lead to an environment where the "right"
services are built, only an environment where services are built the "right" way.
The challenge that Advasco faced was due to the way that analysis typically occurs
in most organizations—as part of a project. While there is always some ad hoc
analysis that results in an idea for a project, it is usually the case that the initial
idea focusing on delivering an end user facing system establishes boundaries that
influence all the decisions that follow. Initially, those boundaries are informal as
the project is given enough definition for funding purposes, and once funded, the
boundaries become more rigid. As a result, even when we are able to break service
development out into its own effort separate from any consumer, one consumer
likely influenced the initial definition. In presenting that service to other potential
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing the Analysis Process
[ 110 ]
consumers, the initial scope sets the context for the conversation, focused on minor
adjustments to the scope, rather than on significant additions that were previously
not researched, yet still closely related.
As experienced by Advasco, the clear indicator that project analysis is impacting the
ability for SOA to deliver on its promises is when the addition of new consumers
results in significant changes to the existing services, whether associated with the
addition of new capabilities or an overhaul of the existing service. These are signs
that inadequate analysis of the domain for the service was done. This isn't meant
to imply that a service should never change, as they most certainly will. It should
mean, however, that those changes are incremental and evolutionary rather
than revolutionary.
SOA governance must play a role in the analysis process to ensure that the "right"
services get built, the desired behavior. The question then, however, is what are the
people, policies, and processes that can ensure it?
Clearly, the missing piece of the puzzle in the case of Advasco, and in most
organizations, is context. Analysis efforts inside of projects, whether it is a service
consumer or a service provider, will continue to occur. What can change is the
contextual information that is provided to the team engaged in that project analysis.
Just as a technology reference architecture based upon service types and service
platforms provided context and policies to guide the decisions associated with
building services the "right" way, we need similar context and policies to guide the
decisions associated with building the "right" services. There are two techniques that
are beginning to be used to provide this contextual information: business process
analysis and business domain modeling.
Business Process Analysis
Business process analysis has gained in popularity thanks to the introduction of
Business Process Management (BPM) technology suites. These suites typically
include a modeling environment, a simulation tool, an execution engine, and a
monitoring and management system. The suite may also include a task management
system, necessary for supporting processes with manual activities.
At its heart, BPM suites are driven by a graphical representation of the process,
known as the process model. This model is an analysis artifact. It represents a
sequence of activities and decisions, both automated and manual, that when
executed, perform a key business process. An example of a business process model is
shown in the following figure:
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 5
[ 111 ]
Expense
Report
Received
Automated
Travel Services Manager Automated
Accounts Payable
Submit
Electronic
Payment
Approve
Payment
Check Report
against Credit
Card Entries
No
Send
Rejection
Message
Does
report
match
receipts?
This very simple process is modeled using Business Process Modeling Notation
(BPMN). While a thorough discussion of BPMN is outside the scope of this book,
this diagram demonstrates the key concepts.
The process starts with the circle on the left. This represents the start event for
the process, which in this example, is the receipt of an expense report. The first
activity that happens is an automated activity within the Travel Services domain,
as represented by the encompassing rectangle, known as a swim lane. This activity
compares the values in the expense report against the charges reported on the credit
card assigned to the submitter. This is represented by the rounded rectangle. If it
matches, the report is forwarded to the manager for the submitter for approval. If
there are discrepancies, a rejection message is sent back to the submitter and the
process is ended. A diamond‑shaped box denotes the decision point. The next swim
lane represents activities performed by the manager. Within this swim lane there is
a single activity of Approve Payment. When complete, the next step is an automated
activity in the Accounts Payable domain, which is to submit an electronic payment
to the submitter. Upon completion, the process is ended.
An executable version of this model can be derived, where automated activities are
mapped to services in the registry, decision criteria can be mapped to a business
rules engine, organizational structure can be imported from an LDAP directory, and
more, all maintaining the relationship back to the original analysis model.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing the Analysis Process
[ 112 ]
At first glance, this model may appear promising. Unlike the traditional application
analysis artifacts, this diagram clearly shows where processing spans boundaries.
Knowing these boundaries does represent a significant step forward, especially
when it includes some information about the organization. The problem, however,
is that just as the application analysis artifacts show a view of a single application,
the above model shows a view of a single process. In this example, there is only
one consumer of a potential electronic payment service. If this service were to be
designed based upon the needs described here, there are a number of additional
scenarios that could be missed. As an example, it could focus exclusively on
electronic payments to employees. In reality, an electronic payment to any number of
entities is likely needed.
In our Advasco example, Elena correctly identified this inadequacy in the approach.
Just as we needed to go outside the boundaries of the initial project and the initial
consumer to define a better service, we also need to go outside the boundaries of the
initial process and the initial consumer to define a better service. Simply expanding
the boundaries of the project or process may not be enough, since the team may not
have any idea how far to expand those boundaries. What is needed is an analysis
effort that is independent of any particular project, one that has no boundaries. This
effort does not need to perform analysis of the entire enterprise. Its goal should be to
perform enough analysis to establish context for the more detailed analysis that will
be performed in projects. It is this context that will allow projects to correctly set the
boundaries of their analysis efforts.
Business Capability Mapping
In the case of both transitional project and business process analysis techniques,
the way to mitigate the risk associated with those efforts was to expand the scope
outward. In the case of project analysis, the recommendation was to seek out
additional consumers for the services that are identified in the initial analysis
efforts. In the case of business process analysis, the same held true, except that
the consumers represent additional business processes, rather than additional
applications. The question, then, is how can we come up with an analysis artifact that
represents this broader view? The artifact that is needed is a business capability map,
one that maps services and their associated capabilities to the different business areas
and domains.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 5
[ 113 ]
First, let's look at the view we achieve through traditional functional analysis for an
application. We result in a picture that looks like this:
Application
User Interface
Service
Data
If we expand our scope to other potential consumers that exist, we see that the
boundaries of the application must be broken down, allowing services and data to
support multiple consumers, as shown in the following diagram:
Application Application Application
User Interface User Interface User Interface
Data Data Data Data
Service Service Service Service
If we do the same thing with a business process approach, we get the
following pictures:
Service Service Business Process
Service Service Business Process
Service
Service
Service Service Business Process
Service Service Service Service Business Process
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing the Analysis Process
[ 114 ]
What these the two pictures above demonstrate is that there will be some services
that will be shared across one or more applications and one or more business
processes. Likewise, there will be some services that will only be used by one process
or one application. What we'd like to do is create a view of the services portfolio
that gives the analysis team appropriate context to understand the extent to which a
service may or may not be shared. Services will come in all shapes and sizes. Some
services will be used by one and only one consumer. Some services will be used by
many consumers. Some services will be used by other services. Some services will
only be shared within a specific business area. We need to provide reference material
for analysts that allow them to predict the scope of use for a service.
The other challenge is to provide some context on how to group capabilities into
like categories to ensure that services are properly scoped when they are initially
identified. While a project will certainly identify one or more capabilities associated
with a service, the project, or even the subsequent discussions with other potential
consumers, may not reveal the proper scope of capabilities that will constitute the
"right" service.
One approach to providing this reference information is to map the capabilities to
the business areas. In this approach, a tabular diagram is leveraged to understand
the relationship between business areas and capabilities, as shown here:
Business Area
Business Area
Business Area
Business Area
Business Area
Business Area
Business Area
Capability A
Capability B
Capability C
Capability D
Capability E
Capability F
Capability G
Capability H
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 5
[ 115 ]
On one dimension are the key business capabilities. These capabilities can have
a hierarchical nature, with high level capabilities such as Manufacturing or
Order Management decomposing into lower level capabilities such as Inventory
Management or Billing, and so on. Some of these lower level capabilities may
support multiple higher level capabilities. On the other dimension are the key areas
of the business. If that area of the business requires that functional capability, we
place an "X" in the cell corresponding to the intersection of the two. The next step is
to sort the capabilities by like groupings. If the exact same business areas use two
or more capabilities, those capabilities should be ordered together. This allows us
to see exactly which capabilities have the potential to be grouped into a common
service. Not all capabilities that are in use by the same business areas will necessarily
be grouped into a single service. For example, capabilities that are required for
all business areas will likely fall into a support area, and it's likely that further
specialization can be made within that area to group those capabilities into services.
Another useful way of sorting the rows in the chart is to order them by the number
of business areas involved. Items that are only applicable to one business area appear
at the top of the list, while items that are broadly applicable appear at the bottom. If
we were to draw rectangles around the checked boxes in each row, we wind up with
a diagram that looks like this:
Narrow
Business Area Business Area Business Area Business Area
Capabilities Capabilities Capabilities Capabilities
BroadScope of Use
Capabilities
Capabilities Capabilities
This gives a visual representation of the scope of use for each of the capabilities.
This can be beneficial when a project is identified that will create a service that will
provide one or more of the capabilities. Prior to seeking out potential consumers,
they now have an idea of the breadth of use that is expected.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing the Analysis Process
[ 116 ]
However, this picture is not complete, because it does not account for areas where an
organization may desire to have a redundant implementation of functionality. There
is always a tradeoff between the cost savings associated with standardization and
the revenue opportunities available to a line of business by pushing new capabilities
out quickly. In general, if you want to move as quickly as possible, you need to keep
as much of your environment as possible under your own control. When you cross
control boundaries, inefficiencies are introduced which slow things up. However, if
cost is your primary consideration, the cost savings associated with standardization
more than make up for the cost associated with the inefficiencies. If we factor this
into the preceding diagram, what we wind up with is a diagram that looks like this:
Area A Area B Area C Area D
Capabilities
Capabilities
Capabilities
Capabilities
Capabilities
Capability
Domain 2
Capability
Domain 1
Capability
Domain 3
Capability
Domain 4
Capabilities
Capabilities
In this diagram, all of the capabilities are grouped into either cells (one set of
capabilities, for one business area, within one domain), horizontal blocks (one
capability domain, but multiple business areas), or vertical blocks (one business area,
but multiple capability domains). Using our Advasco example, the diagram for our
example may look something like this:
Pricing
Customer
Information
Management
Insurance
Products
Customer
Relationship
Management
Product
Management
Insurance Equities Fixed Income Mortgages
Portfolio Proposals, Portfolio Management
Address Update, etc.
Equity
Products
Fixed Income
Products
Pricing Services Mortgage
Management
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 5
[ 117 ]
Here we will see how capabilities map across different business areas. At the
bottom we see that basic Customer Information Management is a shared capability
across the entire organization. However, Customer Relationship Management is
not. Advasco may have determined that there is very little crossover between the
target customers for their mortgage business versus the rest of their business areas.
Likewise, because of the variety of pricing algorithms, the Insurance and Mortgage
areas each have their own, tightly integrated systems with the products offered,
while equities and fixed income rely on a central pricing engine, but specialized
product management capabilities.
This same diagram can be represented in the tabular approach by using color-coding
in the cells to denote whether the business area is using a custom solution for the
capability or the shared solution. Color coding or shading is recommended over
entering a different value in the cell, because a person can very easily pick up the
associations by color. For example, if Capability 3 was shared by Area A and Area
D, we'd have a table that looks like the following:
Capability 1
Capability 2
Capability 3
Capability 4
Area A
Area B
Area C
Area D
This can be a very powerful diagram. First, it can be utilized in validating whether
the IT landscape matches the corporate governance principles. For example, in
the diagram, business Area D has its own implementation of the capabilities for
all domains except for domain 4. If this business area is one where the company is
stressing reduction, the IT landscape is out of alignment with that principle. If this
business area is one where the company is emphasizing growth, then this model may
be perfectly appropriate.
Another excellent use of this diagram is actually as a current state analysis tool. By
surveying the existing application portfolio, documenting their capabilities, and
indicating whether they are shared or not, opportunities for strategic services can
be more easily identified, especially for systems that may have had no plans for
modification in the near horizon.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing the Analysis Process
[ 118 ]
Business Capability Analysis
However, the natural question that arises from this is, "What are the business
capabilities that should be on this chart?" A complete methodology for this is outside
the scope of this book, but there are certainly techniques available. Top-down
approaches include value chain analysis based on the work of Michael Porter in
his 1985 book, Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior Performance.
Wikipedia, as of June 2008, provides the following definition of value chains and
value chain analysis (http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Value_
chain&oldid=215039258):
"A value chain is a chain of activities. Products pass through all activities of the
chain in order and at each activity the product gains some value. The chain of
activities gives the products more added value than the sum of added values of all
activities. It is important not to mix the concept of the value chain with the costs
occurring throughout the activities. A diamond cutter can be used as an example
of the difference. The cutting activity may have a low cost, but the activity adds too
much of the value of the end product, since a rough diamond is significantly less
valuable than a cut diamond.
The value chain categorizes the generic value-adding activities of an organization.
The "primary activities" include: inbound logistics, operations (production),
outbound logistics, marketing and sales (demand), and services (maintenance). The
"support activities" include: administrative infrastructure management, human
resource management, information technology, and procurement. The costs and
value drivers are identified for each value activity. The value chain framework
quickly made its way to the forefront of management thought as a powerful analysis
tool for strategic planning. Its ultimate goal is to maximize value creation while
minimizing costs."
Likewise, many professional services organizations have methodologies that focus
exclusively on the analysis side of SOA. IBM Global Services has a methodology
called Service Oriented Modeling and Architecture, or SOMA for short. Another
resource available is the Capgemini Methodology for Service Architectures, which
was released into the public domain in 2005 as part of the OASIS SOA Adoption
Blueprints effort (http://www.oasis-open.org/committees/download.
php/15071/A%20methodology%20for%20Service%20Architectures%201%202%20
4%20-%20OASIS%20Contribution.pdf). Both of these efforts also include additional
models that provide similar information to the business capability mapping
described earlier, such as the use of heat maps.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 5
[ 119 ]
Finally, there are some industry standard capability models that are available, such
as the ACORD efforts in the insurance industry, or the OTA efforts in the travel and
leisure industries. Many of these efforts go beyond simple standard data definitions
and delve into capabilities and services that are standard across the industry where
they apply.
The end goal of these analysis techniques is to produce reference material for use in
the governance of SOA. To that end, any of the analysis methodologies and artifacts
must provide the following:
A list of business capabilities and their relation to other capabilities in
the organization
A categorization of these capabilities by their purpose in the organization
An alignment of capabilities to organizational unit responsible for the
delivery of those capabilities
With these three key elements an organization can provide the necessary reference
information for their project-based analysis efforts.
Project Inception Checkpoints
So how are these artifacts used for governance? In Chapter 3 we discussed the
existing governance process within the project lifecycle. While many of these artifacts
can, and should, be used as part of the analysis phase, funding has already been
allocated to the project, which puts pressure on the team to constrain scope, rather
than getting the scope right.
The correct time to initially incorporate this reference material is during the inception
phase of an effort, prior to requesting formal funding. As part of determining the
scope and the cost of the work that will be completed, the team putting together the
proposal should be reviewing the reference material, just as a technical architecture
should be reviewing reference architecture before proposing a solution architecture.
You don't propose a project until you've reviewed the contextual information of how
projects should be defined.
The Service Registry/Repository also plays a key role in facilitating the proper
behavior. As mentioned earlier, the models can be filled in based upon current
state analysis. Doing so can identify opportunities for consolidation of multiple
implementations into a single implementation. If these opportunities have been
identified, these services can be entered into the Service Registry/Repository with
a status of "Desired" or "Proposed." If this is done, a team putting together a project
proposal can review the Service Registry/Repository to see if their proposed
capabilities overlap with any desired or proposed service, and if so, their scope and
funding demand can be augmented appropriately.
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing the Analysis Process
[ 120 ]
Therefore, augmenting the previous discussed checkpoints, the Project Inception
checkpoint should answer the following questions:
Has the project identified potential services that it may require?
Has each potential service been mapped back to the business capability map?
Has the scope for each potential service been properly defined according to
the business capability map?
Has the responsible business area for the potential services been identified
and contacted for the purposes of defining scope and funding?
Have existing systems been taken into account as potential service providers
for the purposes of defined scope and funding?
Is all usage of shared services justified according to the current business
capability map?
Is all usage of dedicated services justified according to the current business
capability map?
Does the funding reflect the appropriate scope for the capabilities desired
according to the business capability map?
Does the proposed schedule for the effort reflect the normal release cycles for
any existing services?
Has the sequence of delivery of services and consumers been appropriately
defined to allow for key services to be developed well in advance of
consumer demand?
Summary
In this chapter, Advasco had progressed past their initial success and were now
experiencing some challenges. The state in which they were operating was best
described as just-in-time. Despite successful efforts to manage the service lifecycle,
new things kept coming along within projects that challenged the way that existing
services had been defined. Service providers would need to react just-in-time, since
the project had already been funded and had deadlines that needed to be met.
Analysis of the situation by the Center of Excellence, the Chief Architect, and a
team of key service managers determined that the root cause was the fact that all
analysis discussions around the scope of services did not occur until after the project
had been funded and started. As a result, the approved scope of the project had an
impact on all subsequent discussions. Surprisingly, even when the service teams had
subsequent meetings with other consumers, the requirements of the initial consumer
that identified the service still influenced the discussion and scope definition of
the service.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 5
[ 121 ]
When looking at the analysis methods in use, the team recognized that both the
traditional functional analysis used on projects, as well as the newer business process
analysis techniques associated with BPM suites, both had risks of being short-sighted
in their scope because they were focused on a single project or a single process. The
team chose to form a business architecture team that could perform analysis outside
of the context of any particular project or process. This team mapped the desired
business capabilities back to the key business areas and these artifacts were included
as part of the governance process that is required to achieve funding for projects. As
a result, many projects had their scope, schedule, and funding augmented prior to
approval to ensure that the "right" services were built.
The key to success is the establishment of an effort that allows analysis to be
performed outside of the context of any particular project, and as such, is not overly
influenced by the needs of any one particular system or department. Existing
functional analysis artifacts, including business process models and traditional
functional analysis artifacts, are inputs to the process. The analysis artifact to be
produced by this effort must represent a mapping of business capabilities to the
areas in need of those services. Where a business capability maps to a single business
area, ownership and usage is very clear. Where a business capability spans multiple
business areas, ownership must be determined. Business capabilities that are
desired by the same business areas should be investigated for possible aggregation
into a single service, managed by a single team. It is not required for all business
capabilities to have a single implementation that is used across the organization, but
where multiple implementations exist, the decision to do so must be consistent with
the organization's goals for the business areas involved. A strategy for cost reduction
does not justify having multiple implementations of the same capability.
In order to determine the set of capabilities desired, organizations can take a
top-down approach, such as value chain analysis, or any of the many methodologies
for SOA analysis available from professional services organizations. Likewise,
a bottom-up approach can be used. In this approach, the existing portfolio of
applications is reviewed to document the capabilities associated with them. This may
yield new opportunities across applications that may presently be in a maintenance
mode without plans for any significant modifications that would require taking a
deep look at their current capabilities.
This mapping of capabilities to business areas should be leveraged as part of the
project inception process, where there normally is a governance checkpoint focused
on establishing funding for the effort. Policies that reflect the desired behavior to
build the "right" services must be enforced at this time to get the organization out of
the habit of "just-in-time" change and onto the path of strategic service development.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing Run-Time
Behavior
SOA Governance in the run-time environment needs to go beyond security
and versioning. As many as possible aspects of the run-time behavior between a
consumer and a provider should be expressed in the service contract and enforced
by the run-time infrastructure. The team at Advasco will learn exactly what can
happen when these aspects are not captured in policies and not enforced by the
run-time infrastructure.
Preparing for Partner Services
"Tomorrow is the big day, isn't it Maria?" asked Spencer.
"Yes, it's great to finally make our services available to our agency partners. We've
had so much success with our use of services internally; it's exciting to be opening
them up to our partners and making it easier for them to do business with us. I know
many of the independent agents have choices on whose financial products they want
to market. Anything we do that improves our image in their minds can help our
business," said Maria.
"Did you run into any challenges during the testing phase?" asked Spencer.
"No, I'd say things went very smoothly. All of our partners were able to execute
transactions successfully. We had a few challenges trying to get the mappings right
between the messaging standards and our own internal formats, but that's normal
for these types of services."
"How did your performance tests go?"
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing Run-Time Behavior
[ 124 ]
"All of the tests went well. We had a good idea on the expected load based upon the
analysis of the existing transactions that we execute through our legacy interfaces.
We even ran tests that included our own internal use of the same services, as well
as some typical traffic for services that leverage the same infrastructure. Everything
looks good."
"Sounds great. Well good luck. I'm sure everything will go off without a hitch. Your
team has a great track record."
True to form, everything did go off without a hitch. Everyone was on edge for the
first day as traffic started to flow through the system, but no errors were encountered
on the first day, the first week, or even the first month. Agency partners began using
the services on a staggered schedule, and all had completed their integration by the
end of two months.
Ed, an analyst on Maria's team, had the responsibility of checking the usage reports
for the services. These reports contained some basic information, simply showing the
number of requests a service had received, the number of requests that succeeded/
failed, the average response time, and the average message size. As the number of
requests increased over time, the average response time for the service had remained
consistent. There was the normal variability from day to day, but the running
average was 650ms. During the first month, Ed was religious about monitoring the
performance of the services. Over the second month, however, because things had
gone so smoothly and because his other responsibilities were competing for his
time, Ed began to monitor the usage reports less frequently. At the end of the second
month, Ed hadn't reviewed the reports for over two weeks. However, he knew that
all of the agency partners had completed their integration, so he wasn't surprised
at all to see that the number of requests per day had increased significantly. The
average response time was still around 650ms, so he thought nothing of it.
However, what Ed hadn't noticed was that the number of requests had already
exceeded the capacity levels that were tested during the performance testing of the
service. Ed hadn't been involved in that effort, so he wasn't aware that the existing
behavior was outside of the norm. Furthermore, his instructions in monitoring the
service in production were only to ensure that we reacted quickly when something
went wrong. There were alerts in place that would notify him if the service
stopped responding.
For the next week, Ed reviewed the daily reports, knowing that all consumers were
now using the service. The average response time continued to remain steady. There
was an increase in the number of requests each day, but he attributed this to the
normal fluctuations of the business. After the first week, Ed stopped reviewing the
reports, putting his faith in the automated alerts. This would prove to be a mistake.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 6
[ 125 ]
The First Sign of Trouble
Three weeks later, Andrea called Maria on the phone. "Maria, are you aware of any
problems with the services in use by our agency partners? I just received a phone
call from our agency relations manager telling me that they're experiencing poor
performance from our services."
This caught Maria off guard. "I'm sorry Andrea, but this is the first I've heard of
any problems. I know we have monitoring in place to detect if the services are
unavailable, but I haven't heard of any alerts from it. I'll get right on it and talk to Ed
and see what our reports are saying."
Andrea replied, "Thanks Maria. Please let me know as soon as you find something so
I can get back with the manager."
Maria immediately called Ed and asked, "Ed, have you seen any anomalies in our
agency services? I just got a call from Andrea that said some of our partner agencies
have been complaining about poor performance."
Ed said, "Umm…. Let me go into the service management console and pull up the
latest report. I haven't looked at them in a while since things had been going so well."
Maria was already concerned after hearing this. She had expected that Ed was
looking at these reports every single day. Admittedly, however, she too had been
guilty of ignoring many of the usage reports she received by email after her services
had been in production for a significant length of time.
"Whoa."
"What do you mean, 'whoa?' That doesn't make me feel comfortable, Ed."
"Our average response time is about three times what it was three weeks ago,"
he replied.
"Are we seeing any failures?"
"No, I'm not showing any failed requests, just some which are taking quite a long
time to execute. Let me check with operations and see if the application server cluster
hosting these services has been rebooted recently. I know from past experience that
those services can start to behave strangely if they're not rebooted every now
and then."
Ed checked with operations, and sure enough, the application servers hadn't been
restarted since the service went live three months ago. He scheduled a change
request for that night to bounce the servers and let Maria know.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing Run-Time Behavior
[ 126 ]
Maria passed this information back to Andrea, "We did see that the average response
time for the service went up significantly over the past three weeks. No requests
failed, which is why we didn't receive any monitoring alerts. Ed checked into it, and
determined that the application servers hosting the service had not been bounced
since the service went live. We've scheduled that change for tonight, and hopefully it
will fix the problem."
"Thanks for digging into this, Maria. Keep a close eye on things tomorrow."
Day Two
The server bounce was completed as scheduled, and Ed immediately started
watching the usage reports when he arrived in the morning. Unfortunately, after
the first hour of usage, things didn't appear any better. By 10:00am he knew that the
problem was still there and called Maria.
"Maria, it looks like our server reboot didn't fix the problem. I've watched the first
two hours of data from today, and the response time is still pretty poor. Perhaps the
problem is somewhere in a back-end dependency."
"Thanks for keeping a close eye on things, Ed. Rally the people that you need to
look into the dependent systems and let me know what you're able to find out. I'll
advise Andrea."
Maria notified Andrea that the problem wasn't fixed by the reboot and asked her to
make sure that the Agency Relations manager was aware, in case more phone calls
came in.
In the meantime, Ed had gathered together the operations staff responsible for
monitoring the database system and the mainframe components that the services
utilized. He explained the situation to them and asked them to research their logs
and determine if their systems were performing as expected.
Unfortunately, it wasn't an easy task to determine whether these systems were
behaving properly for the requests associated with these services. Both the mainframe
and the database system were used by many other systems. The operations team
promised to do their best, but told Ed that they couldn't pull the logs, perform the
appropriate filtering and analysis, and get the data until the end of the day.
Around 5:30pm the operations team got back to him, and unfortunately, Ed was
no closer to an answer than he was at the beginning of the day. If anything, he was
more confused about what was going on. From the perspective of the database and
mainframe, everything was performing as expected. They had not found any signs
of problems within the database or the mainframe. All indications concluded that the
systems were performing normally.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 6
[ 127 ]
Ed stayed up very late trying to determine what the root cause of the problem was;
however, unfortunately, he didn't come up with any answers. He left late that night
after sending Maria an email letting her know that he was no closer to solving the
problem. The good news was that they still had not recorded any failures, but the
response time for the services had increased again today and Ed knew that sooner or
later that response time would cause problems.
Day Three
Ed didn't sleep well that night, knowing that another day of searching for the root
cause of the problem lied ahead. He made sure to get a venti latte from Starbucks on
his way in, knowing he'd need the extra caffeine to keep him going.
He called together the operations team that had been helping him first thing in the
morning, and decided to start from scratch.
"Team, as you know, the performance of our services that support our agency
partners has been degrading, and it's rapidly getting worse. We've rebooted our
application servers, and checked our dependencies on the mainframe and database,
both of which checked out okay. I'd like your thoughts on where else to look.
Another set of eyes may help point something out that I haven't noticed."
Sarah, from the middleware monitoring group asked, "What do these services do? Is
there any chance that some bad code could be causing the problem?"
Ed said, "I know the team did significant performance tests before going into
production. I think any bad code would have been caught by that testing effort."
Alex, from the Linux team, asked, "What does the CPU look like on the application
servers? Perhaps some of the XML processing is chewing up CPU and slowing
things down."
Ed replied, "I've checked that as well, and I didn't see anything out of the norm.
That's what is so strange. Based upon CPU load, and the data from the database
systems and the mainframe, we shouldn't be seeing this behavior."
Sarah suddenly got a thought. "Ed, this sounds very familiar to a debugging scenario
I had back when we had issues with our messaging infrastructure. In that case, we
were building up backlogs of messages to be processed. When we looked at data
from points where processing was occurring, everything looked normal. It was
only when we looked at the incoming message traffic that we determined we had
a bottleneck. Have you looked at the number of requests being processed to see if
there's something strange there?"
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing Run-Time Behavior
[ 128 ]
While Sarah didn't intend any ill will, Ed felt like a fool. He had not reviewed the
number of requests that had been flowing through the system. Ed sheepishly said,
"I can't believe I haven't looked at that. Let's bring up the reports."
Ed quickly brought up the management console, and there, in black and white, was
some glaring information. Traffic had been steadily increasing every single day to
the point where the system was now trying to handle ten times the traffic for which
it was designed.
Sarah said, "Well, it looks like we know the source of the problem. The real question
is what do we do about it?"
Alex replied, "Would it help if we added some additional servers to the farm for
these services?"
Ed said, "Unfortunately, I think that's a temporary fix. We need to figure out where
all of this additional traffic is coming from."
Alex suggested, "Can we capture a sample of the incoming requests to
determine that?"
Ed said, "Our service management infrastructure may already have that information
for us. Let me dig deeper into the reporting console and see what I can find out."
Back on the management console, Ed was disappointed when he saw that the
default reporting that was enabled could only show aggregate information across
all of the consumers. However, all was not lost because Ed knew that every service
request contained a unique identifier that indicated the source of the request.
This had become a requirement for all service messages back when Advasco
dealt with versioning for the first time. It was simply a matter of instructing the
service management system to index its data based upon this message element. Ed
configured the platform to do so, and then waited for the results.
Within the next hour, Ed had already collected enough data to determine which
consumer was flooding the system with requests. He let Maria know, and she
immediately went to the Service Registry/Repository to determine the point-ofcontact for that consumer, since it was an external partner. The partner was notified
and began researching its own systems in the meantime; they agreed to disable
their consuming application from sending service requests until the root cause
was identified. Advasco was lucky this time. The partner disabled their consuming
application only because it was not deemed to be mission critical, and their business
could withstand not using it for a few days until the problem had been corrected.
Had this been a business critical application, turning it off may not have been
an option.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 6
[ 129 ]
Day Four
The next day, Ed arrived far better rested than the previous morning. His pager
didn't go off at all overnight. He reviewed the reports for the service usage, including
his more detailed breakdown by consumer, and was pleased to see that there were
no additional problems once access from the offending partner had been disabled.
He gave Maria the good news, "Maria, it looks like we've resolved the problem. Once
the consumer who was flooding our system was disabled, things suddenly started to
work better. I've reviewed the reports since that change was made, and we are well
under the capacity levels for which the system was designed."
"That's great news Ed. However, my bigger concern now is how do we prevent it
from happening again?"
"We should have some answers for you later this afternoon. I'm on my way to meet
with the SOA Center of Excellence to discuss exactly that topic."
"Let me know what the recommendation is as soon as you know."
In the meeting, Spencer started things off, "Thanks for joining us Ed. As we get
started, I want to remind everyone that our purpose here is to figure out how we
can prevent this from happening again, not to dwell on activities that did or did not
occur that led to the problems. Ed, can you give us a brief walkthrough of what the
root cause was determined to be?"
Ed proceeded to inform the COE that the performance degradation was directly
attributable to a continuously increasing load from one consumer. Because the
operations involved were all read-only, the requests went unnoticed until they
reached a level that started impacting other operations.
Jared asked the question, "Do we know what kind of testing was done by our
partners? It seems that this should have been caught during one of our
performance tests."
Raj replied, "I don't know if that would have caught the problem. The partner that
caused the problem was in production for over three weeks. Even when we've run
long running capacity tests that accelerated the pace of requests, we've never run
something that would have simulated three weeks' worth of activity."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing Run-Time Behavior
[ 130 ]
Spencer then asked, "I know we did our own internal capacity testing based upon
numbers from the web application many of the partners previously used. Did
we have that request data broken down by partner, or did we only have
aggregate data?"
Ed replied, "It's my understanding that we only had aggregate data available to us."
Spencer added, "That's unfortunate. I don't know that there's much we could have
done to prevent this situation except to go to a completely asynchronous invocation
model. Given that the majority of the operations are read-only, I don't know that our
partners would have accepted that."
Jared replied, "If we had the data broken down by consumer, would that
have helped?"
Spencer said, "Remember our debate around service versioning? We had some good
discussions about policy-driven infrastructure, and I think we've just found another
area where it can be applied. While I know we can't control the logic of our partners'
applications, we can take some actions to ensure the integrity of our systems and the
availability of our services to other partners. As it stands right now, our services are
out there for our partners to do whatever they want. We don't bill by the invocation,
rather we get revenue indirectly through the policies they sell. It's unrealistic for
them to think we can handle whatever bad code they may have written. How many
of you have cable modems at home for broadband access?"
About two-thirds of the COE raised their hands. "Raj, what happens if you start
doing some peer-to-peer transfers to give your latest home videos to your extended
family? Does your cable company let you consume all of the bandwidth for your
neighborhood? No, they throttle it. I think we need to do the same thing here. The
only missing piece is the levels at which we throttle things."
Ed replied, "I don't know that any of our partners would be happy if some of their
requests were throttled."
Spencer replied, "The message we need to deliver is that our intent is not to throttle
normal use of the system, or even slightly above normal use. What we want to do
is ensure that significantly abnormal use is detected and dealt with appropriately to
ensure the integrity and availability of the system for all of our consumers."
Jared asked, "How do we go about determining what 'normal' behavior is?"
Spencer replied, "It really should just be an extension of the same mechanisms we
used to determine the original capacity. Furthermore, it should be a conversation
between each partner individually. We have some partners that are going to generate
significantly more traffic than others, and that should be taken into account."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 6
[ 131 ]
Ed asked, "But what if this was a brand new service where we didn't have any
reference data to draw from?"
Spencer replied, "How would we go about determining the initial capacity? If we
don't have some kind of numbers, we're at risk of running out of capacity without
any consumer having bad code. We simply need to do the analysis that we already
should be doing anyway."
Raj stated, "I think this approach will work. We just need to extend the existing
service contracts to include anticipated usage information which includes thresholds
that are tied back to specific notifications. The first threshold may result in a warning
message being sent to the partner POC, while the second threshold would result in
messages being rejected."
Jared said, "I agree with that approach. The analysis that occurs during the
development lifecycle should establish the initial baseline for the expected behavior.
This can then be refined after some time in production, and thresholds can be
adjusted accordingly."
Spencer said, "The way you two describe it, it sounds like this is something that
should be handled by our XML appliances, much in the same way we're dealing
with security policies and versioning policies. Ed, is this something you can
look into?"
Ed replied, "Well, my job is more focused on monitoring the environment, but I work
closely with the team responsible for engineering the environment. They should
know whether or not this could be handled by the infrastructure. I'll contact them
and get back to you as soon as possible."
After the meeting, Ed went by to see Sarah from the middleware monitoring group.
That group was also responsible for the XML appliances. "Sarah, thanks for your
help in our troubleshooting effort. I have another question for you."
"Sure, Ed. What's your question?" she replied.
"It turns out that the problems were caused by one of our partners slowly flooding
our system with service requests, probably due to a bug in their code. The COE has
asked that we look into the capabilities of the XML appliances in enforcing policies
on the request rate allowed on a per consumer basis. Is this something you can help
me with?"
"I'd be glad to help you out, Ed. Let me clear it with my manager, but I don't expect
that it will be a problem."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing Run-Time Behavior
[ 132 ]
Testing the Solution
After researching the capabilities of the XML appliance, Ed and Sarah felt confident
that it could do what they desired, although some adjustments had to be made. The
biggest hurdle was that two appliances were used within the external gateway, but
they normally didn't communicate with each other. The challenge this posed is that
a client that sends 1,000 requests per hour may have 500 go to one appliance and
500 go to the other appliance. If the threshold was set at 1,000 requests per hour on
each appliance, theoretically, a client could actually send 2,000 requests per hour, if
requests were equally balanced in load across the two appliances. If the threshold
was set at 500 requests per hour on each appliance, there is a risk that requests could
be throttled when the client was still below the 1,000 requests per hour rate and their
requests were not balanced across the two appliances equally.
After some debate, Ed and Sarah took a slightly different path. Rather than having
immediate enforcement at the appliance, they chose to have the policy enforced
via the analytics engine on the management server. This engine received metric
information from each appliance, correlating the information. It could then analyze
the true rate of requests across all appliances and take action if thresholds were
exceeded. In this case, the action was to invoke a service on the management console
itself that would update policies on the appliances to reject requests for the consumer
whose SLA was violated for a configurable time period. At the end of the time
period, the policies would be restored back.
They then executed their tests with two consumers, one that maintained a steady rate
of requests, and one that had a steadily increasing rate of requests. They first verified
that without any throttling policies, the consumer with the stable rate of requests
would eventually see performance degradation as the rate of requests increased from
the other consumer, replicating the behavior that was seen in the production.
A policy for throttling requests was then established based upon the rate of requests
that caused the performance degradation to begin. Two thresholds were established.
Exceeding the first threshold simply resulted in an email notification being sent to
the POC associated with the consumer, violating the second threshold resulted in
subsequent requests being rejected until the rate of usage in the moving window
dropped back below the threshold. Throttling levels were then assigned to each
consumer and the test was re-run.
The test was successful. The consumer with the stable rate of requests (which was
below both thresholds) never saw any degradation of performance. The consumer
with the ever-increasing rate of requests was notified successfully via email when the
first threshold was reached, and requests were rejected for a time period when the
second threshold was reached.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 6
[ 133 ]
The results of these tests were communicated back to the COE, and then back to
Maria. Maria worked with the Partner Relations manager to determine how to
implement the solution. Meetings were held with each partner to establish the
baseline usage, the warning threshold, and the rejection threshold. Baselines were
based upon production usage to date.
Once the partners modified their code to take appropriate action based upon the
receipt of a rejected request, the changes were implemented. While the partner that
caused the problem that set the chain events off had found and fixed their bug,
the experience brought light to the importance of daily monitoring and analysis
of trends. Both the partners and Advasco began making associations between the
usage characteristics and the context of the time periods measured that proved very
valuable to their businesses and to the ability of operations to properly manage the
environment. Thankfully, none of the partners ever had any requests rejected in
production, although the policies came in handy in the test environments when some
of the partners' testing scripts had some bugs in them.
Run-Time SOA Governance and the
Service Contract
In Chapter 2 the concept of the service contract was first introduced. The focus was
on the functional interface, and the delivery schedule for the service implementation.
In Chapter 4 the contract was extended to contain versioning information. By
specifying the version of the service interface associated with a particular client,
transformations and routing rules can be put in place to facilitate having multiple
versions of a service implementation in production and ease the timeframe in which
consumers must migrate.
In this chapter the focus is on the rest of the run-time behavior of the systems. Once
again, remember that governance is about people, policies, and processes that are put
in place to achieve the desired behavior. In the example in this chapter, the desired
behavior for the run-time environment had not been established, nor had policies
been created to ensure any implied behavior.
Based upon the reactions of the Advasco staff, one could infer that the desired
behavior for the run-time environment was:
Ensure consistent performance of services for all consumers
Ensure that no one consumer can prevent other consumers from
accessing services
Detect problems before they are reported by consumers
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing Run-Time Behavior
[ 134 ]
The first potential problem is when the desired behaviors are not explicitly specified.
We inferred desired behavior from the actions of the staff. Therefore, the first step in
establishing run-time SOA governance is no different than it was for the general SOA
adoption effort: define your desired behavior. Once this has been done, the next step
is to have the appropriate people establish the policies that will lead to the desired
behavior. Once again, in our example, this step had not been taken. From Ed's failure
to review the metrics everyday, to the failure of the infrastructure to prevent an
individual consumer from flooding the system with requests, there were potential
areas where policies could have encouraged the correct behavior.
Ensuring Consistent Performance
In order to ensure consistent performance of services for all consumers, what are the
policies that are needed? While Advasco did not explicitly specify their policies, we
can again infer some best practices by analyzing the activities that took place when
the services were first moved into production. As with most systems, a significant
amount of attention is given when they first go live, and the attention goes down
over time. What is preferable is to establish a standard for monitoring that applies
regardless of whether it's the first day in production or the fiftieth day in production.
The activities of Advasco on day one led to the following policies:
The performance of each service must be monitored and reviewed no less
than once per business day.
Metrics must be collected for all services at all times.
Metric Collection
Metric collection is clearly the linchpin of any effort to govern run-time behavior,
so additional policies are needed around them. In addition to the daily aggregated
information, Advasco was able to see real-time information when they were in
debugging mode. Once again, the metric collection behavior should be expressed in
terms of policies:
Aggregated metrics must be available at five minute, 15 minute, and
hourly intervals.
Aggregated metrics at less than one hour intervals must be available for up
to seven days.
Aggregated metrics at one-hour intervals or greater must be
available indefinitely.
Raw metrics for individual service requests must be available for one day.
•
•
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 6
[ 135 ]
Metrics must be sortable by:
Service requested (across all consumers)
Operation requested (across all consumers)
Consumer (all service requests from a single consumer)
Consumer type (for example, internal versus external)
Time of day
Any combination of the above
The exact aggregation intervals will vary by company, the important part is to have
them explicitly specified and expressed as policy. Keeping in mind the concept
of policy-driven infrastructure, a change in policy should be quick to implement.
Therefore, if an organization wanted to change the aggregation intervals, this should
be something easily done in the matter of minutes or hours, rather than days or
weeks. In choosing the aggregation intervals, the organization must be sensitive to
the storage required for the metrics. While it may be possible to store raw metrics for
every single service request for one day when an organization is only processing a
few million each day, an organization that processes hundreds of millions of requests
may not have that luxury.
The last policy in the list is also one of key importance. Simply recording a
timestamp and a response time for a request yields good information, but it also
ignores even more. An organization must examine the metadata that will be stored
with each record. Items that should be considered for service requests are:
Time request was received
Source IP address of request
Identity of requester (as represented on the message, such as a user identifier)
Identity of consumer (should be different from user identifier, such as a
system identifier or company identifier)
URL requested
Service requested
Operation requested
Size of the request
Unique identifier (can be generated by the infrastructure)
One or more attributes extracted from message payload
•
°
°
°
°
°
°
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing Run-Time Behavior
[ 136 ]
For the last item, it can be useful to reserve elements in the metric record for
customization by individual service owners. While capturing the entire payload can
be valuable in debugging, it does not lend itself well to searching and indexing, in
addition to potentially taking up large amounts of storage. Instead, key attributes
from the message can be extracted via XPath or XQuery expressions and stored as
indexed attributes in the metric record. For example, if a service request looked
like this:
<soap:Envelope xmlns:soap="http://schemas.xmlsoap.org/soap/envelope/"
xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xmlns:s="http://
www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xmlns:tns="http://www.advasco.com/">
 <soap:Header>
 <wsse:Security xmlns:wsse="http://docs.oasis-open.org/wss/2004/01/
oasis-200401-wss-wssecurity-secext-1.0.xsd">
 <wsu:Timestamp xmlns:wsu="http://docs.oasis-open.org/wss/2004/01/
oasis-200401-wss-wssecurity-utility-1.0.xsd" wsu:Id="Timestampaaddaaf5-1207-44d7-a5ab-64b6bf5f678e">
 <wsu:Created>2008-05-27T21:23:25Z</wsu:Created>
 </wsu:Timestamp>
 <wsse:UsernameToken xmlns:wsu="http://docs.oasis-open.org/
wss/2004/01/oasis-200401-wss-wssecurity-utility-1.0.xsd" wsu:
Id="SecurityToken-53f28e17-d945-4966-aef1-3ab95e680721">
 <wsse:Username>jdoe</wsse:Username>
 <wsse:Password Type="http://docs.oasis-open.org/wss/2004/01/
oasis-200401-wss-username-token-profile-1.0#PasswordDigest">2gy4KlZvot
tIW989aDMD6JTL/Mk=</wsse:Password>
 <wsse:Nonce>EqJ39Y6g6V+X9XgLIwx1Wg==</wsse:Nonce>
 <wsu:Created>2008-05-27T21:23:25Z</wsu:Created>
 </wsse:UsernameToken>
 </wsse:Security>
 <tns:Consumer>
 <tns:SystemId>PolicyEntry</tns:SystemId>
 </tns:Consumer>
 </soap:Header>
 <soap:Body>
 <tns:GetCustomer>
 <tns:customer-id>abc123</tns:customer-id>
 </tns:GetCustomer>
 </soap:Body>
</soap:Envelope>
to extract the identity of the consumer from this message, the following XPath
expression would be used:
string(/soap:Envelope/soap:Header/tns:Consumer/tns:SystemId)
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 6
[ 137 ]
For service responses, a similar set of attributes should be examined:
Time that the response was received
The IP address that the response was sent from
The identity of the requester (as represented on the message, such as a
user identifier)
The identity of the consumer (should be different from the user identifier,
such as a system identifier or company identifier)
URL associated with response
Service endpoint associated with response
Operation associated with response
Size of the response message
Unique identifier
Message ID of the request (for correlation to the original request)
One or more attributes extracted from the request message
One or more attributes extracted from the response message
Finally, for reporting purposes, you need to consider how to efficiently associate
information that wasn't contained on individual messages with the metric
information. For example, while an individual message will contain the identity of
the consumer, it won't necessarily tell you if that consumer is an external consumer
or an internal consumer. This information is likely contained in a service registry/
repository, where the relationship between consumers and providers is maintained.
Joining the two at the time the report is generated may not be easy to do, depending
on the tools involved.
Preventing Consumer Starvation
Looking at the second component of the desired behavior, what are the policies
that will ensure that no one consumer can prevent other consumers from accessing
services? The two policies that Advasco chose to adopt and enforce were:
Consumers must be notified when service usage exceeds a threshold where
continued usage at that rate can impact the availability to other consumers.
Service requests from a particular consumer must be rejected when the usage
rate from that consumer exceeds a threshold, jeopardizing the stability of the
service and its availability to other consumers.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing Run-Time Behavior
[ 138 ]
Of course, the natural question is what are the thresholds? Therefore, there were two
additional policies that Advasco adopted:
All consumers must establish a usage threshold for each service used that,
when exceeded, will result in the consumer's POC being notified.
All consumers must establish a usage threshold for each service, higher than
the notification threshold, that when exceeded, will result in service requests
from that consumer being rejected.
This leads to a discussion on expected versus unexpected behavior. It is very difficult
to implement any of these policies unless there is an idea on what the expected
behavior is. To do this, these additional policies for service consumers are needed:
A service consumer must provide a baseline characterization of service
utilization prior to any production usage.
A baseline characterization must include enough information to adequately
describe normal behavior and easily distinguish abnormal behavior when
reviewing actual metrics.
The phrasing on the second policy is the key. Often times, organizations may tell
groups that they need to provide the expected number of requests per hour or
day, but this may not be the right way to capture normal behavior. For example,
there may be financial applications in the enterprise that are only run at the end
of the month, quarter, or year. Trying to express their baseline characterization of
service utilization on a daily basis doesn't make sense, as most days will have zero
utilization, while other days there may be hundreds of thousands of requests sent.
At the same time, it is important that this utilization be expressed in a manner that
allows the infrastructure to provide automated monitoring wherever possible.
Service consumers are not the only ones that must provide a definition of expected
behavior. Service providers must also characterize their behavior, leading to the
following policies:
A service provider must provide a baseline characterization of service
performance prior to any production usage.
The baseline characterization must include enough information to adequately
describe normal behavior and easily distinguish abnormal behavior when
reviewing actual metrics.
A service provider must provide a baseline available capacity, based upon
the configuration of the infrastructure at the time of deployment.
Baseline performance and available capacity must be updated whenever
changes to the underlying service implementation and associated platform
are made.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 6
[ 139 ]
Characterizing normal behavior from the standpoint of the service provider is a bit
different. While service consumers are focused on providing information on how
they will use services, service providers should be focused on describing information
on how resources are utilized when a service is used. A service consumer cannot,
and should not, have any idea of the CPU or memory utilization associated with the
processing of its service requests, but it certainly should have an idea regarding how
many requests it will typically send, and when it will send them. A service provider,
on the other hand, absolutely should understand how CPU and memory is utilized
when service requests or processed, but it is up to the service consumers to define
when those resources are actually utilized.
Defining Service Consumer Baselines
In the case of service consumers, initial baselines are established through analysis,
rather than formal testing. For example, if the service consumer is a web application,
the team should be able to characterize the interaction that a typical user may have.
By looking at the individual web pages that are requested, the team can inspect the
code to determine the number of services requested associated with the processing
on each of those pages. By multiplying by the number of simultaneous users on
the system, and any variation in the rate of usage, the service utilization can be
characterized. Factors that should be looked at include:
Will the application be used as part of normal daily processing, or is it
associated with particular business events, such as the end of a financial
reporting period?
Is the application used by home users or by business users? If the former, a
higher utilization may occur during evening and weekends, while the latter
may see usage within the hours of 8am to 5pm, Monday to Friday.
Is the application utilized in a particular region, or is it deployed globally?
Are there any differences in the size of user population according to the
region? These questions will determine whether or not the application
experiences periods of low utilization during the day, or if a sustained load is
seen over the entire day.
Is the application used as a part of processing revenue producing activities,
such as placing financial transactions, or is it primarily used in support
of business activities, such as updating address information. Often times,
support activities take place when people "have time". In the financial
services industry in the United States, many of the support activities are done
outside of the hours in which trading markets are open. As a result, a spike
of activity for support applications can occur when the office is open, but the
trading markets are closed, and during the lunch hour.
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing Run-Time Behavior
[ 140 ]
Is the system replacing some other system or technique for performing the
same purpose? For example, if an organization is exposing business-tobusiness services for accepting orders that is complimentary to an existing
web-based application for the same purpose, it can reasonably assume that
the amount of orders processed via the service interface will be similar to the
number of orders processed via the web application.
Upfront analysis is very critical to ensuring the success of the system at launch,
but baselines determined from actual utilization ultimately will be a more valuable
metric. This is why many organizations leverage analysis and research firms that
collect data from actual utilization measurements from other companies doing
similar activities in forming their upfront baselines. This leads to additional policies
for governing the run-time environment:
Consumers must update their expected utilization baseline based upon an
analysis of actual measurements from production after the system has been
rolled out to the full user population and time allowed for initial learning.
Whenever business events or the business climate changes, the baseline
utilization must be adjusted to account for the change.
What these policies state is that the baseline is not a set of metrics that are established
once and then ignored. The baseline must be continually refined as part of the
lifecycle of the service consumer. Clearly, the first event is the rollout of the service
consumer in production and the adoption by the end users. However, other business
events will continually modify this. For example, suppose a company has retail
locations or branch offices, and some of the service consumers are systems that run
in these offices. The opening or closing of an office will clearly change the number
of service requests that occur. This is consistent with the lifecycle view of systems
presented in Chapter 4. Events may not result in coding changes to systems, but
they do result in changes in how the systems are utilized, and if IT is not in the
loop on these business events, its systems are at greater risk of suffering a failure as
a result. Ultimately, it is the responsibility of the service owner to ensure that the
relationships with service consumers are healthy. Regular communication should
be established with service consumers, and part of that communication should be a
review of the usage metrics collected, as well as a review of any upcoming changes
or business events. Likewise, a service consumer should maintain their own view of
service usage, to ensure that both parties are seeing the interaction in the same way.
Defining Service Provider Baselines
In the case of service providers, baselines are established through formal
performance testing. Prior to being promoted to production, testing should be
performed to determine the following:
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 6
[ 141 ]
The average response time for typical service requests. This should include
an appropriate sampling of message sizes that are typical for the service
usage. For example, if the message size can vary from 1KB to 1MB, both of
the extremes should be tested, as well as some values in the middle.
The CPU load for typical service requests. This may only be measurable
when a sustained load is applied, rather than trying to determine the load
associated with a single request.
The memory utilization for typical service requests. Likewise, this may
only be measurable when a sustained load is applied, rather than trying to
determine the load associated with a single request.
The request rate at which point some performance degradation can be
detected, either in the form of increased response time, 100% CPU utilization,
or 100% memory utilization.
The request rate at which point performance becomes unacceptable, either
due to sufficiently large response times or server crashes.
Verification that no memory leaks exist when the service is placed under a
sustained load for an extended period of time, simulating the system running
for several weeks or months in production.
An understanding of the scalability of the system based upon increases in
the physical infrastructure allocated to the service, be it additional physical
servers, CPUs or cores within existing servers, or additional memory. It is
important that the service team define the scalability model.
The impact of other service processing that may exist on the same
infrastructure. While clean room testing that limits utilization to just the
service in question is necessary, so is testing that simulates the production
environment. A sustained background load of typical traffic for other
services that share the same infrastructure should be applied.
It is critical to execute this testing in an environment as similar to production
as possible. While many organizations cannot afford to have a duplicate of the
production environment, at a minimum, the environment must provide performance
characteristics than can be extrapolated to the production environment. For example,
if the production environment contains four servers, each with two dual-core CPUs,
testing on a single server that contains the same two dual-core CPUs should yield
about a quarter of the capacity of production. If the testing environment instead
contains a single server with a single-core CPU with less processing power, or if
the testing environment leverages virtualization technology, the results may not be
as easy to extrapolate to the production configuration, if even at all. Due to these
challenges, it is important that service providers follow the same technique as service
consumers. Baselines must be re-assessed once the service has been in production for
a suitable amount of time in order to understand what normal behavior is.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing Run-Time Behavior
[ 142 ]
These baselines are particularly important when capacity planning is taken into
consideration. Many organizations have separate capacity planning teams whose
job is to manage the physical infrastructure and how it is allocated to solutions. It is
unlikely that an individual service will have its own dedicated infrastructure; rather,
it likely shares those resources with other services. As a result, the capacity planning
team must understand the resource demands of each individual service, as well as
the baseline load from each consumer. As new consumers and services are preparing
to go live, the capacity planning team must examine their expected resource
requirements and scale the environment as needed.
Managing Run-time Usage
Once baselines have been established, the run-time infrastructure can now be
properly leveraged to enforce the policies. Remember that Advasco had two policies:
Consumers must be notified when service usage exceeds a threshold where
continued usage at that rate can impact the availability to other consumers.
(Advasco used email for notification, but other means such as a phone call or
pages are appropriate. The exact mechanism should be negotiated with
each consumer.)
Service requests from a particular consumer must be rejected when the usage
rate from that consumer exceeds a threshold, jeopardizing the stability of the
service and its availability to other consumers.
Capacity planning should factor in both the baseline resource utilization of the
service provider and the expected usage by the known consumers. The baseline
resource utilization yields the scalable unit of capacity. From there, it is simply a
manner of determining how much capacity is needed based upon the expected
request load from each consumer (peaks, not average), plus an appropriate amount
of overhead. Once the capacity has been set the thresholds for notification and
throttling can also be set. Clearly, the best behavior is if no notification or throttling
ever happens, but at the same time, the availability of the infrastructure cannot be
sacrificed. The intent of the thresholds is to handle unexpected behavior.
A service intermediary or gateway such as an ESB or XML appliance is the
appropriate place to enforce these policies. By the time requests get to the actual
service endpoint, it is typically too late to prevent the requests from impacting the
system. An intermediary typically sees a request for a few milliseconds at most,
while the service endpoint may spend significantly more, whether tens or hundreds
of milliseconds. Furthermore, a change to the thresholds is simply a matter of
changing a policy versus redeploying code.
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 6
[ 143 ]
One challenge associated with monitoring service usage, especially in high
throughput environments, is dealing with horizontally scalable infrastructure. That
is, infrastructure where capacity is added by increasing another server, device, or
process, rather than by expanding the resources available to existing servers, devices,
or processes. For example, a typical ESB is a software system. In order to add
capacity, a new instance of the software system must be installed on another server.
In the case of an appliance, a new physical device is installed.
As soon as a second software instance or appliance is added to the environment,
there is a challenge with visibility. The true request load is actually the cumulative
load of all intermediaries processing requests for a given service. However, the
problem is that these devices or software instances typically only have visibility
to the requests each device or instance processes. This is normally addressed
by enforcing policy at the metrics aggregation point, typically the management
console, rather than on the software instance or device itself. Metrics are pushed
out from the intermediaries to the central console. The central console aggregates
the metrics, applies any thresholds, and then updates the behavior of the individual
intermediaries accordingly.
There may also be challenges associated with load distribution. Thresholds may be
established based upon the total capacity, but that may assume an equal distribution
of requests across both intermediaries and service endpoints. In reality, it is easily
possible to configure an intermediary in a way such that when the aggregate of all
service requests are examined, there is an equal load distribution, but for a specific
service, the requests may not be evenly distributed. This must be factored in when
thresholds are set. If thresholds are set too high, an unequal distribution of load
could result in a system failure even though a threshold was never reached.
Detecting Potential Problems
The final desired behavior for Advasco was detecting problems before consumers
report them. While the two levels of thresholds provide some comfort that warnings
will be issued when behavior gets outside of the norm, this approach is still very
reactionary. A threshold has been reached, notification happens, and corrective
action must be taken as soon as possible.
Synthetic Transactions
A common approach that is used today to detect problems before they are reported
is to leverage synthetic transactions. That is, requests are pushed through the
systems in question, but they typically leverage dummy data that can be easily
removed from production databases or focus on read-only operations. This is a
common approach for web applications, especially ones that face the public Internet.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing Run-Time Behavior
[ 144 ]
A company may leverage an external testing service that relies on testing points in
various geographic locations, so that the support desk can know whether there are
regions of their audience that are experiencing connectivity problems outside of their
control. This is an important point for Internet-facing applications, since the audience
may include many individuals that are not technology savvy. They may not know
how to recognize a problem with their service provider versus a problem with the
website they are trying to visit.
Even for intranet-based applications, synthetic transactions can add significant value.
Many intranet applications are dealing with a much smaller user base, and many
have very sporadic periods of usage. If a problem arises during a lull in usage, it
could go undetected for quite some time. The use of regularly scheduled synthetic
transactions ensures that some traffic will be flowing through the system throughout
the day, and that the worst-case scenario for detection will be the time in between
each scheduled transaction.
The use of synthetic transactions can certainly be extended to SOA, although the full
set of synthetic transactions in use by the company must be carefully managed. For
example, if a web application currently has synthetic transactions hitting it every five
minutes, it is certainly possible that the services it depends on are being exercised
as part of those transactions. If a separate set of synthetic transactions is created
strictly for testing services, the services are now being tested twice—once as part of a
consuming application and once on their own. While a service provider should never
rely on consumer testing for regular health checks, we also don't want an excessive
amount of redundant traffic.
Predictive Analysis
The use of synthetic transactions works very well for environments where the
load on a service is sporadic, but it still is a very reactionary approach. Synthetic
transactions detect problems that already exist; it's just hoped that they allow you to
find out about them before an irate user or partner calls.
The state that is most desired is where we can recognize patterns and trends in the
environment that are likely to lead to a problem. Corrective action can then be taken
to fix the situation prior to any problem ever occurring. The multi-tiered thresholds
provide some comfort, but that approach is geared toward a short-term trend, such
as the number of requests in a five minute interval, or at most a sixty minute interval.
They don't provide benefit in examining the long-term trends. Suppose Advasco's
Claims division issued a mandate that claims checks would only be submitted by
direct deposit, and told all of their agents that their clients' accounts would need to
have bank account information added within three months. While there are no new
applications involved, a likely scenario is that the back-end service that updates
the associated client records would begin to see an increase in traffic. As with any
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 6
[ 145 ]
mandate with a deadline, the closer we get to the deadline, the greater the load
the service will see. We now have a business condition that changed the pattern of
service utilization. Unless the historical trends are being watched, these situations
will go unnoticed, just as they did for Advasco. The consumer that had the bug did
not start flooding the system with requests one day, rather the number of requests
increased a little bit each day, until the impact became noticeable to consumers.
There are many tools that are available for analyzing historical data, whether it is
a full-blown business intelligence system, or some of the specialized management
tools in the SOA space. Tools, however, can only make processes more efficient.
If the desired behavior is to reduce the number of client-reported problems, the
appropriate policy is to look at the metrics collected on an appropriate basis,
typically at least once per business day. It is the responsibility of the service manager
to strive to understand the data, and have full confidence in explaining all anomalies.
Historic trends are very important to understand when something is an anomaly
versus the normal variation in usage from day to day. If a service has an average
response time of 60ms one week, and two weeks later it has an average response
time of 80ms, this behavior must be explained; even if both cases never resulted in
any errors. While 20ms may not be perceptible by the consumer, it still represents a
33% increase in response time, and this type of variation must be explained. Just as
an architecture review is meant to prevent a project from proceeding down a path of
poor architectural decisions, the governance processes associated with the run-time
environment must strive to catch things before they become a problem. Education
and prevention is a more effective long-term strategy than detection, although all
three will always be necessary.
Service Management Technologies
Service management, also marketed as run-time SOA Governance tools, are another
area where the vendors have tools that can assist in the governance processes.
Remember that no tool will give you governance; however, tooling can make your
governance processes more efficient.
In Chapter 4, there were three classes of products introduced that can play a role in
policy-driven infrastructure:
Enterprise Services Buses
XML Appliances
Service Management Platforms
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing Run-Time Behavior
[ 146 ]
While at first glance one would think that service management platforms would be
the natural choice for providing service management capabilities, the decision is not
so easy. If we use a Venn diagram to illustrate the capabilities associated with these
three domains, it looks like this:
XML Firewall Service
Security
Monitoring, Dashboards,
and Reporting
Service
Management
Policy-Driven
Infrastructure
ESB
Service Development
and Execution
In the center is the sweet spot for policy-driven infrastructure. This includes aspects
of service mediation, which is the domain of the ESB; service management, which
is the domain of the service management platforms; and service security, which
is the domain of the XML appliances. At the extremes of each area are capabilities
that can only be found on products within those domains. In the domain of service
mediation, most ESBs can also act as a service development and execution platform.
Very few, if any, XML appliances or service management platforms can be used as
a tool for building new services. In the domain of service management, the most
sophisticated monitoring, dashboards, and reporting are only available with the
service management platforms. In the domain of service security, it is typically only
the XML appliances that provide sophisticated XML firewall capabilities. Therefore,
when choosing infrastructure to assist in the space of run-time governance, one must
look at the requirements in all of the domains, and decide whether one product can
cover all of your needs or if a combination of products is the best scenario.
Within the service management space, one must also consider the domain of
traditional systems management technology. Much of what was described in the
Advasco example is standards systems management guidance, just applied to the
domain of services. One can certainly argue that run-time governance is not exclusive
to SOA, but it is true that the establishment of new boundaries and components in the
form of services increases the need for effective run-time governance.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 6
[ 147 ]
Traditional systems management technology tends to fall into the category of
passive monitoring. Passive monitoring means that some monitor, be it an agent, a
tap, or probe, collects the metrics. It optionally performs some analysis or posts an
event, but always makes the metrics available to a centralized reporting console and
dashboard. These monitors are considered passive because they have no influence on
the flow of requests through the run-time infrastructure. In contrast, all of the major
players in the service management platform space practice active monitoring. Their
agents or gateways have the ability to not just collect metrics, but also to intercept
requests and apply policy. In other words, their products contain a feedback loop
between the metric collection and the policy enforcement. In order to determine that
a consumer is exceeding a threshold for the number of requests allowed, incoming
requests must be monitored. The current request rate over some pre-configured
interval is then updated, and fed back into the policy enforcement infrastructure.
On the next request, the infrastructure stops it in its tracks, checks the current
request rate, and only allows the request to pass if the threshold for throttling has not
been reached.
Regardless of the particular technology chosen for service management capabilities,
whether the more primitive capabilities of an XML appliance or ESB, an extension
of existing enterprise systems management technology, or a dedicated services
management platform, you should strive to leverage an open system. The feedback
loop described earlier can be shown like this:
Turn on
throttling
Run-Time Request
Event
Collection Point and
Policy Enforcement
Point
Management
Service Event Listener
Analytics Engine Metrics
The policy enforcement point, which is also the metrics collection point, collects
metrics and sends them to some analytics engine. The analytics engine can determine
if a threshold has been reached, and fire off an event. This same technique also
applies to other areas, such as exception management. Rather than a threshold on
number of requests, there may also be threshold on the number of failed requests
that need to trigger action. The same analytics engine can perform analysis on the
metrics and issue events based upon the policies governing the interaction.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Governing Run-Time Behavior
[ 148 ]
A listener will receive the event and issue a service invocation via a management
service at the collection point to tell it to start throttling requests for a particular
consumer, or whatever action is appropriate. While most traditional systems
management products provide the metric collection and the analytics engine,
they lack the listener with direct integration into the management services of the
enforcement point. However, if the enterprise systems management can publish
events in a standard form, it is entirely possible that a BPM engine or a simple JMS
listener can be leveraged to listen for the event and then invoke the management
services of the enforcement point to make the change, provided the enforcement
point exposes such a service. As long as the monitoring and analytics technology
has the capability to publish events that can be consumed outside of its boundaries,
and the enforcement point is exposing its management capabilities as services, this
process can be completely automated, just as it is done with a services management
platform. In the same vein, if a services management platform is leveraged,
while it may provide these feedback loops implicitly, it may not allow its own
analytics engine to publish events outside of its boundary, or it may not expose its
management capabilities via service interfaces. This leads to a closed system, which
limits its long-term value in the enterprise.
Summary
This chapter focused on run-time SOA governance. While this topic was briefly
touched upon in Chapter 4 with regards to versioning, this chapter filled in the
remaining details. As governance is about people, policies, and processes put in
place to achieve a desired behavior, run-time SOA governance is about the people,
policies, and processes put in place to ensure the desired behavior of the systems
involved at run-time.
The service consumer must specify an expected load that their system will place
on the service provider, while the service provider must specify the resource
consumption associated with an invocation of the service. This establishes the
baseline behavior from which policies can be created that establish monitoring
thresholds and associated activities when those thresholds are breached, whether it
be notifications or throttling/rejection of requests.
Historical observations are critical for the proper management of the system; simply
relying on infrastructure that provides alerts when a pre-determined threshold is
reached or a heartbeat fails is not sufficient. By constantly observing the run-time
behavior of the system, trends can be noticed, insights can be gained, and the service
can be continually improved.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 6
[ 149 ]
Infrastructure that can assist in this effort falls into the same three categories
mentioned in Chapter 4: ESB technology, XML Appliances, and Service Management
Platforms. Each technology domain has its strengths and weaknesses, but there
is a significant amount of overlap across them. The needs of your organization
will dictate whether you need a single product from one domain, or two or more
products from multiple domains to meet your needs. The key is in ensuring that the
products chosen have an open, extensible architecture.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
SOA Success
So what does SOA success look like? What happens when your governance efforts
are successful in changing the behavior of the organization? This chapter will give
you a picture of what outcomes can arise by describing Advasco five years from the
time they initiated their efforts. Change does not happen overnight, and the change
associated with SOA adoption must be viewed as a long-term commitment.
Celebrating Success
Spencer's day began almost like every other day. Traffic was kind to him this
morning, and he arrived a few minutes earlier than normal. He was walking in from
the parking garage when he ran into Elena.
"How are you this morning, Spencer?" she asked.
"I'm doing well. The traffic over the bridge was a lot better than normal, so that
always helps to start the day off right," he replied.
"The traffic was pretty good for me, as well. It's been a while since that happened!"
"Hey, do you know what Andrea is going to talk about at the Town Hall today?
Things have been going so well, I'm curious what she's going to say! In years past,
she's always had to pass along the latest complaint from outside of IT and rally us to
do something about it, but I haven't heard any rumblings at all. My contacts outside
of IT can't stop talking about the good job we're doing for a change."
"I'm as much in the dark as you are with this one, Spencer," she replied. "While she's
consulted me prior to Town Halls before, she's been silent about this one."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
SOA Success
[ 152 ]
"Oh well, I guess we'll all find out soon enough. Well, hopefully the demeanor
outside of IT is an accurate indicator, and there will be nothing but good news at
the meeting."
"I think you can be pretty confident about that. If there were any chance the news
was going to be bad, I'd be aware of it. I've got a few things I need to take care of this
morning, so I'll see you at the meeting."
"Have a great day, Elena, I'll see you at ten."
"Shortly before ten o'clock, Spencer stepped into the auditorium and spotted the rest
of the SOA Center of Excellence, along with Elena, Maria, and some of the other key
people who had been involved in Advasco's SOA efforts. They were all chatting idly
waiting for the meeting to begin. Spencer sat down next to Maria and asked her, "Do
you have any idea what Andrea is going to talk about?"
"No, I don't. I've been trying to figure it out as well! You'd think we were going to an
Apple announcement with the secrecy around this meeting," she replied.
"I think we're about to find out, here comes Andrea," he said.
Andrea walked into the auditorium with a smile on her face. Of course, she had
good reason to smile, and was excited about having the opportunity to share it with
the rest of IT.
"I want to thank all of you for taking the time out of your schedules for another
Town Hall. From what I gather, there's a lot of speculation going around on what
I'm going to talk about today. Given my track record with these Town Halls, you're
used to me talking about something that needs to be improved. Well today, we're not
going to do that. Instead, I'm going to focus on our success—success with SOA."
"Five years ago to the day we began our SOA efforts. At that time, Advasco was
taking a beating. Our customer satisfaction rating was one of the lowest in the
industry, and our executive team decided we needed to do something about it. Our
analysis of the problem indicated that one of the biggest problems we had was the
disparate customer systems for our different financial products."
"Elena, our Chief Architect, assigned Spencer to assist in that effort, knowing that
he had an interest in service-oriented architecture. That event kicked off our SOA
efforts. I don't know if all of you realize just how far we've come, but I wanted to
take some time to put it all in perspective for all of you."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 7
[ 153 ]
"Five years ago Advasco's IT department consisted of many silos, each with their
own systems that could be best described as 'forced integration'. That is, our systems
only talked to each other when we were absolutely forced to do so. We struggled
with delivering timely solutions. We had multiple implementations of the same
functionality scattered all over IT, and not just two or three, but sometimes five or
six different implementations. We lacked the necessary metrics to really understand
the value that our solutions were providing to the business. It had reached the point
where we were at a competitive disadvantage at least partly due to the state of our
IT systems."
"Beginning with our Customer systems, we began a journey to change that. While
our initial focus was limited to the auto and home insurance groups, the success of
the effort eventually led us to a single view of customers across all of our lines of
business, something our competitors have not been able to duplicate so far. Today, I
am happy to report to you that Advasco has been named the number one company
in our industry for customer satisfaction for the last year. It is thanks to the hard
work of all of you, and in my opinion, the efforts that IT led in embracing SOA not
just within IT, but throughout Advasco, that made it possible. So, today, we're going
to do a bit of reminiscing. People often say that things are so slow to change, and
when you're looking at it from one day to the next, it can seem that way. However,
when we look back five years we can really see exactly how far we've come and how
much we've changed."
"Our efforts to adopt SOA weren't easy by any means. In the early stages, there were
more than our fair share of detractors who simply wanted to keep building systems
the way we've always built systems."
Spencer looked around the room and made eye contact with Ramesh. Ramesh gave
him a little smirk, knowing that his project manager had fought the move to SOA in
the beginning. Ramesh was able to reverse that decision two years later and share in
the success.
"Admittedly, we also had our blind supporters. I'll be the first one to confess that
we were a bit too eager to bask in the glow of our initial success. I'm sure Elena and
Spencer still wish that I had consulted with them a bit more before delivering my
Town Hall message asking the staff to embrace SOA."
This was part of the reason that Andrea had the respect of all of the IT staff. Her
insight was normally excellent, but she also wasn't afraid to admit that sometimes
that insight needed to be fleshed out in a bit more detail before unveiling it to
everyone. The staff respected her candor. Elena and Spencer both were pleased that
Andrea called this out, since it created some unique challenges for them in trying to
encourage the adoption of SOA at Advasco.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
SOA Success
[ 154 ]
"While the staff did embrace SOA exactly as I had asked, that simply led us down a
path of service silos. We had lots of services, but things didn't look any different. We
had the same solutions we always had; only now they had services inside of them.
In fact, we sometimes had two or three services that did the same thing. This had a
risk of increasing the complexity of our IT landscape, but thankfully, we made some
changes to address that."
"It began by recognizing that in order to have services that could be reused someone
needed to be responsible for the delivery of the service, not just for their own needs,
but for the needs of the organization."
"On hearing this, Maria remembered vividly her discussions with Jim and Beth on
who would own and deliver the service for account information. Jim and Beth were
seated a few rows back as well, and Jim took the advantage of the opportunity to
remind Maria by saying, "Andrea, I nominate Maria for the effort!"
Everyone laughed, knowing that Maria had become one of the strongest mentors in
the organization to new service managers. She had become the resident expert on
how to embrace a consumer-centric philosophy within a team, and other teams that
were struggling with delivery to their consumers were constantly seeking her out
for advice.
"I'm sure many of you would like to have Maria managing the services in your
areas. But as we learned, having one single expert is not enough. While we didn't
let it go that far, relying heavily on one person typically results in that person being
very overworked and at extreme risk of burning out, taking our chances for success
with them. Rather, we realized that we needed to have a broader perspective and
create an environment for growth and success from many people. To enable this, we
created a Center of Excellence; one that I believe was instrumental to getting us to
where we are today."
"The Center of Excellence began by filling in the details that I had left out in my
Town Hall, and providing an answer to the question 'Why SOA?' to the organization.
They then set out, acting as mentors and mediators on projects, educating and
enlightening as they went along. They probably could have stopped there, and
have many of their efforts considered successful for that year's review, but the team
did not view that as success. Rather, they recognized that they needed to be more
engaged with the projects occurring in the enterprise, rather than being exclusively
focused on education and communication."
Raj and Jared both remembered those initial meetings with Spencer, when the team
was feeling particularly frustrated about their ability to make an impact in the way
that projects were building their solutions. Their perseverance paid off in the
long run.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 7
[ 155 ]
"They took on the burden of working with all of our projects to ensure that the teams
were aware of services that existed, and that the rest of the organization found out
about new services that were being created. They facilitated the ownership decisions
that naturally occurred when multiple projects recognized the need for a common
service. In short, this team established the initial policies that represented the desired
behavior we needed in our development practices, and then made sure those policies
were followed through a combination of education and active mentoring."
"This was just the first of many examples where the COE recognized that things
were becoming stagnant, and that new efforts were needed to keep things moving
forward. The next hurdle came when we had to make changes to one of our key
services. Many of my colleagues at other companies have said to me, 'How did
you do it? As soon as we had to make a change to a service, everything started to
unravel.' We did it because we didn't just slap together a solution for that service.
Instead, the COE recognized that things will change, and that we need to plan for
change, rather than react when it happens. They introduced the concept of Service
Lifecycle Management to our efforts, which represented a significant departure from
the way we've traditionally done things. We all had to stop thinking in terms of
projects and start thinking in terms of the delivery of capabilities."
"Several of you jumped right on this concept, and for those key services that had
been created and changed, this proved to be very valuable. Unfortunately, we still
hadn't reached the point where we wanted to be. From my perspective, there still
seemed to be quite a bit of scrambling that occurred at the beginning of projects in
trying to determine the services necessary for the solution. Even worse, the majority
of our services were still only appropriate for the project in which they were created.
Finally, I saw a number of services that in subsequent releases had capability
additions or modifications that made me wonder, 'How did we miss that with the
original version?'
My initial thoughts were to turn to the COE, but instead, I asked our chief architect,
Elena, to gather up some of the best service managers we had and discuss this
problem. In their analysis, the team recognized that all policies and processes defined
by the COE had been followed. Rather than continue to look for something that had
been performed incorrectly, the team decided to look for ways that things could
be changed."
"I'm sure many, if not all of you, have heard the definition of insanity attributed to
Albert Einstein. He said, 'The definition of insanity is doing the same thing over and
over again and expecting different results.' This is a very important point that all of
us need to remember. If we're not achieving the results we hope for, simply stating
that we're not achieving those results and then going back to our cubicles and doing
the same work we were doing will not change anything. When I came up here years
ago and simply told all of you to embrace SOA, did that change the outcome? Yes,
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
SOA Success
[ 156 ]
we did get services, but they were a drop-in replacement for something else. So, in
reality, nothing did change. Now, when we were confronted with the question of
how to ensure that the 'right' services get built, simply telling our analysts to work
harder was not going to cut it."
"The team determined that a change was needed in the contextual information
available to the project teams. Without proper context, the team was going to
continue to make decisions based upon the scope associated with that project. Even
when services were broken out of those projects, the initial context was still rooted
there. I see that a few of you may not quite grasp this, so let me try to give you a
comparison point. When you go to the grocery store, do you buy just the food you
need for the next meal, or do you buy the food you need for the entire week? If you
only knew about your next meal, you'd only buy the food you needed for that meal.
Suppose the recipe included milk, and suppose you went to your neighbors and
asked them if they needed milk too. They might, and you might buy enough for
them. What's the problem here? Did you ask them if they needed anything else from
the store? Did you check your planned meals for the rest of the week and see if you
needed more of anything, or other items that you hadn't thought of? The whole part
of actions was influenced by the initial context of your next meal and the fact that it
needed milk. This, unfortunately, is how we executed our projects."
"The fundamental change that was needed was to provide more context going into
these efforts. If you had your meals planned out for the entire week, your grocery
shopping would probably be much more efficient over the course of the week,
wouldn't it? Such was the case for us. We needed to provide better context before
starting our projects to enable us to be more efficient in their delivery."
"To do this, we engaged a local consulting firm to assist us in developing our
business architecture. The artifacts from this effort broke down the capabilities of our
businesses into services in increasing detail, enabling us to see where opportunities
for reuse existed, and where, given our current business model, opportunities for
reuse should not be pursued. It was far easier to determine the areas of immediate
need and demand as a result. The best part of this was that the decision to pursue
a business architecture was not made by IT leadership; rather Advasco leadership,
including my counterparts, made it. Through our efforts in embracing SOA and
demonstrating the optimizations that we had made, it was clear that changes were
needed outside of IT to continue our progress. We took a service-oriented view of
the entire business, not just IT, which naturally made our SOA efforts much more
aligned with our overall corporate goals, causing more significant change."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 7
[ 157 ]
"No longer were we asked to deliver particular projects, rather our efforts began to
split into service development efforts associated with the business service domains
identified in our business architecture, and clear consumption domains that
represented the systems that our users typically interact with directly. From this
point on, my executive counterparts have been as big of a proponent of SOA as
we have."
"That commitment became very important when we ran into some challenges with
our first services exposed to our external partners. I'm sure that most of us gathered
here know that when you're inside your own house, it's far easier to get away with
less than perfect behavior. When I take my kids to someone else's house, however, I
always tell them, 'I want you to be on your best behavior.' Unfortunately, that's not
what happens each time. We had gotten away with some immature monitoring and
management practices, whether by luck or just putting up with it, and I take full
responsibility for not setting the bar for what was expected. It was a good learning
lesson for all of us. We learned that while we still need to be monitoring our systems
for failures, it is equally important, if not more important, to understand what the
typical run-time behavior is, and always look into deviations from that behavior."
"So where are we today? We have hundreds of services in production. Some are
strictly used by internal consumers, some are strictly used by external consumers,
and some are used by both. Some have one consumer, some have many consumers,
but nearly all of them are meeting our expectations on the number of consumers.
Where we expected reuse, we're getting it, and in other areas, where we've built
services for reasons other than reuse, such as reducing the time to respond to
regulatory changes, we're seeing those results."
"More dramatic is the change that has occurred within the organization, both within
IT and outside of IT. Previously IT was very closely aligned to specific business
areas and the applications within them. Today, both the non-IT organizations
and the IT organization are aligned along services and service consumers. The
business architecture we have developed clearly indicates those areas where reuse
and standardization has the most value, and the areas where specialization and
customization has the most value. The organizational structure follows this, and
as a result, we are widely considered to have the best resource utilization in the
industry. Rather than being the ones who respond to the change occurring in our
industry, we are now the ones driving the change in the industry, and our stock price
shows it. We have made a fundamental change in the way we utilize IT, one that has
put us years ahead of our competition. This change is not rooted in the particular
technologies that we have chosen to use, but rather in the way that we behave, from
how we define the IT efforts we invest in, to the way we manage those solutions
when they are in production. Ask any expert on business improvement, and they
will tell you the hardest thing to change is corporate culture and behavior. Well,
we've done it, and all of you should be commended for it."
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
SOA Success
[ 158 ]
"In recognition of this feat, I am pleased to pass along an announcement from our
board of directors and CEO. First, in recognition of the hard work and time that has
been spent in achieving this goal, Advasco is returning some of that time to you and
your families. The four days between Christmas and New Years Day will be paid
company holidays this year. For those of you that are in operational positions that
require that you work these days, you will be given four additional holidays to use
at other times in the year. Second, the company will be issuing a stock grant of 100
shares to all employees with at least six months of service as of today. This is both a
recognition of what we've achieved, as well as an incentive for everyone to keep up
the hard work, as these shares will be even more valuable five years from now as
long as we strive to always be changing our behavior in ways that will improve
our results. Our SOA efforts are successful, but they are not over. Keep up the
good work!"
Changing Behavior
If this narrative has not made it clear, the key to success with SOA lies not with
the technologies you choose, but the changes in behavior you are able to make.
Changing behavior is one of the most difficult things an individual can do, and is
even harder for an organization. It is an effort that will not happen in days, weeks, or
months, but over years. Milestones must be established to guide the path along the
way, and the journey is never over.
One only needs to look at the struggles many people have with weight loss to
understand the difficulty in changing behavior. My desired goal may be to lose
twenty pounds, and there are many ways of achieving that goal. I can make many
short-term decisions to achieve that goal, such as skipping meals, but if my behavior
does not change, those twenty pounds will quickly return, and possibly even more.
Such is the same with SOA. As shown in the Advasco example, an organization
can quickly build services, but this may not yield any reduction in the cost of IT
solutions, the speed in which they are delivered, the responsiveness of IT to changing
business demand, or any of the other lofty goals frequently associated with SOA. A
specialized program can be created around a specific change occurring, much like
what occurred in the late 1990's when companies had to build an Internet presence.
Did the companies get a website up and running? Absolutely! Did those websites
make dramatic changes to those businesses? In a few cases, yes, but in the majority of
cases, they did not. If anything, in many cases it simply made things more confusing
and more complex, because it was not clear how those Web presences integrated into
the company's operating model. Many companies built their website, and then went
right back to the old way of doing things, only now with the maintenance costs of an
under-utilized Web presence weighing them down.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 7
[ 159 ]
The Inherent Risk of Governance
If you were to go into ten different IT departments and ask them for their thoughts
on governance, chances are that at least nine of ten, if not all ten, would have a
negative reaction. To many, governance creates visions of a review board or police
force that is completely disconnected with reality, and that simply gets in the way
and does more to keep work from getting done than actually improving things.
To counter this prevailing opinion, one must redefine governance. This book
consistently uses the definition of the people, policies, and processes that an
organization employs to ensure a desired behavior. When establishing governance
in an organization, the focus, first and foremost, needs to be on the behavior. All
too often, the focus is placed on the people, policies, and processes, without ever
having communicated the desired behavior. If that behavior is not clear, then all
remaining activities will be questioned. For a particular problem, is it possible that
a single team of developers building it from end-to-end can get it done faster? Yes.
Is getting the project completed as quickly as possible the desired behavior? Not
necessarily. Schedule is certainly an important factor, and for people working on that
project, including the project manager, that may be the subject that comes up most
frequently. If the staff is not educated on the other important desired behaviors that
also impact long-term decisions, they cannot be expected to change their behavior
without strong resistance.
In Andrea's speech to IT, never once did she mention the word "governance," but the
word "change" was used throughout. At the end of her talk, she even emphasized
that it wasn't a change in technology that had led to their success, it was the changes
in behavior they made. If there is a message that needs to be communicated, it is
not that an organization needs SOA governance; rather it is that an organization
needs to change their behavior. Furthermore, in order for continued success, the
organization must embrace change, and always strive to be improving. Advasco
never settled for some of the short-term success they had achieved throughout their
efforts. Rather, when initial success was achieved, the next step was to look for more
success, always building upon the work that had been done. It is not surprising that
industry observers have frequently recognized that the companies that have the
greatest need are often the ones that never achieve the benefits, yet the companies
that are already ahead of the pack and succeeding tend to adopt new approaches like
SOA far more easily, even though the relative benefits for them are likely less. This is
because the corporate culture of the more successful companies is one of continued
improvement, always looking for ways to improve, rather than being resistant to
anything other than the status quo, despite the apparent need.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
SOA Success
[ 160 ]
For this reason, it is important to first recognize where your company is today, and
determine what the desired behavior is. If it's not a significant change from where
you currently are, a change to the corporate culture that introduces rigid review
processes, Centers of Excellence and more, could do more harm than good. For an
organization whose current behavior is far removed from the desired behavior, a
more abrupt change may be the only thing that will get them there. The one golden
rule when it comes to governance is that the most successful approach is when
you can make compliance the path of least resistance. The right combination of
education, automation, structure, and enforcement must be leveraged to make
that happen.
Changing Governance Over Time
Finally, your approach to governance must evolve and change over time. Advasco
continually was faced with new situations that required new people, policies, and
processes, and that was solely based on the changing questions of building services
the "right" way, building the "right" services, and ensuring the run-time environment
behaved properly. The examples didn't cover other possible changes such as growth
in the company, mergers and acquisitions, or regulatory changes from outside
the organization.
Back at the beginning of the book, the topic of governance was introduced using
typical municipal governance. This is a good example for understanding the impact
of changes in the environment. What is the impact on a city's governance when
it grows from 5,000 people to 15,000 people? It is likely that some stop signs have
turned to traffic lights, and some changes to the speed limit on certain roads have
been made. It is also likely that the city has added to its police force. However, these
are the simple ones. The bigger challenge is heavily dependent on the 10,000 people
that were added. Is the average annual income of these people $50,000 or $500,000?
Putting this in context of a typical corporation, if a company acquires another
company in a different geographical region, how will the governance effort extend
to cover the efforts in that region? Simply put, they must change. It could be as
simple as putting the new staff through an education curriculum, it could require
adding people from that new location to the policy-making board, or it could require
amending policies, since the location of development may dictate whether redundant
services are allowed or not.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 7
[ 161 ]
SOA Governance
Project-Driven
Application Silos
Extending
Project
Governance
Run-Time
Governance
Pre-Project
Governance
People
Policies
Processes
Capability-Driven
Service Lifecycle Management
Clear Consumption Domains
Clear Service Domains
SOA Adoption
Success
Changes to
Summary
Adopting SOA does not consist of one or two projects or one large program. Rather,
it is an effort that will likely take several years. In reality there is no "completed"
state, just as there is no completed state associated with application development.
There were always new applications to build or existing ones that required
modification. It is important to stop and take assessment of the progress that has
been made at regular intervals, but more importantly, to ensure that the change in
behavior that was desired is occurring. Establishing governance to guide behavior is
not a simple task, and when the environment changes your approach to governance
needs to change with it. It may mean involving new people, establishing new
policies, or changing your processes. In the end, governance is a key to changing the
behavior of your organization to meet the goals desired by your SOA efforts.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Establishing SOA
Governance at Your
Organization
The adoption of SOA can represent a fundamental change in the way you deliver
technology solutions. While many books have been written on the technical aspects
of SOA, it is the cultural aspects that can pose the biggest challenge. An organization
must learn how to break down the boundaries that have built up over time, and
leverage the assets available to them in a more effective manner. SOA governance is
about establishing the appropriate structure to guide an organization through this
change with people, policies, and process. While it can begin as an extension to the
normal project governance process to include appropriate use of service technologies
like XML, SOAP, or REST, it must go beyond the core technology guidance and into
changes in how development teams interact with each other across the organization,
changes in how services and their consumers are managed at run-time, and changes
in how an organization determines what solutions will be built in the first place.
This book has presented the story of a fictitious company, Advasco, and their
experiences with SOA governance. Some of their examples may have been very
relevant to your own organization, and some of them may have not. Every company
is unique with its own corporate culture. A Center of Excellence may be required
for success at one organization, while another organization may not need to
establish that level of formality. One company may get significant benefit out of a
commercial Registry/Repository product while another company may achieve the
same benefits by utilizing an open-source wiki. Factors such as company size, IT
structure, IT locations, business goals, and competition are some of many that
play a role in determining the right approach. In all cases, if your company does
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Establishing SOA Governance at Your Organization
[ 164 ]
not clearly articulate its desired behavior, have people responsible for establishing
the policies that will elicit the behavior, have consistent policies throughout the
organization, and establish processes for education, communication, measurement,
and enforcement, you will struggle.
This chapter will walk through the three major components of a successful SOA
governance effort: people, policies, and processes. Various areas will be covered
that a company must consider when adopting SOA. Some may be areas that are
not applicable; some may be areas that are very applicable. Use it as a cookbook for
determining the right SOA governance approach for your organization.
People
There are many different people that can play a role in your SOA governance efforts.
This section will go over the various roles and their responsibilities within SOA
governance, whether it be in establishing policies, or in the processes associated with
education, communication, measurement, or enforcement. It will also call out how
these various roles can be organized and the various engagement models that can
be utilized.
People
Service
Manager
Solution
Architect
Enterprise
Architect
Information
Architect
Security
Architect
Technical
Lead
Business
Analyst
IT Manager
Platform
Manager
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 8
[ 165 ]
Solution Architect
The solution architect is the person responsible for the technical leadership and
decisions on a project or program. Being the technical decision maker, this person
is responsible for the project's compliance with the technical design-time policies.
This includes both the solution's architecture, for which the person likely has direct
responsibilities, as well as the solution's design, for which the person will be working
with the developers and other project staff. Typically, the solution architect has a
larger role in ensuring that services are built the right way. In ensuring that the right
services get built, the solution architect must work closely with the lead analyst on
the project.
The solution architect is also responsible for ensuring that the appropriate run-time
governance policies are established. If the project delivers a service consumer, the
solution architect must work with the lead analyst to determine the expected usage
for all services. If the project delivers a service provider, the solution architect must
determine the resource consumption associated with a service invocation.
It is important to remember that the solution architect is a role. Your organization
may not have a formal job title of solution architect, but someone will play this role
on each and every project.
Business Analyst
The business analyst is the counterpart to the solution architect on a project, focusing
on the functional aspects of the solution. They frequently perform requirements
gathering activities, create use case diagrams, and may also be responsible for
business process modeling. A more senior business analyst will have a significant
amount of domain knowledge and may have key relationships within the
organization outside of IT.
Within the SOA governance effort, business analysts play a key role in determining
the appropriate functional boundaries for services. If you are able to move beyond
the boundaries of projects and pursue the development of business architecture
models, as discussed in Chapter 5, business analysts may be a significant part of
the effort. If your enterprise architecture organization is focused on technology
architecture, an effort to establish business architecture will require the domain
knowledge of your most senior business analysts.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Establishing SOA Governance at Your Organization
[ 166 ]
Technical Lead/Domain Architect
The technical lead and/or application architect is typically the job title associated
with individuals that act as solution architects. Frequently, however, these
individuals also have domain architecture responsibilities. That is, they may have
oversight over several projects within a particular domain, or a role in establishing
reference architectures within a particular domain outside of the context of any
particular project.
Clearly, these individuals have a role in the many of the governance policies
discussed earlier in the book. If an organization chooses to establish a SOA Center of
Excellence, it is very likely that the domain architects will play a significant role. The
domain architecture provides context for all of the projects that are executed within
that domain. This can include business process analysis or business architecture
development, as discussed earlier. It may also include guidance for particular
technologies that are only used within that domain, such as ERP modules.
A particular challenge for this role is that these individuals frequently come from
a development background, rather than an analyst background. The differences in
architecture from domain to domain are typically not in the technologies utilized,
but the functional domains involved. If these individuals do not have the proper
functional knowledge of their business domains, they need to work closely with the
key analysts in their organizations.
Finally, the technical leads must have clear and open communication with each
other. It is likely that the current organizational structure does not reflect the
boundaries between service consumers and service providers, meaning that there is
significant redundancy across those domains. In the early stages of SOA adoption,
these domain architects must work together to provide assistance to the IT managers
in determining appropriate ownership.
Enterprise Architect/Technology Architect
The enterprise architect plays a very similar role to that of the domain architect. The
key difference is that enterprise architects normally deal within domains that are
applicable to the entire enterprise. This tends to include all of the pure technology
domains, as well as security. Recently, enterprise architecture is expanding into the
business architecture space, being seen as a key to aligning IT with the rest of the
company. Organizations that are embracing business architecture will likely include
domain architects as part of their enterprise architecture team.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 8
[ 167 ]
In terms of SOA governance, the enterprise architect, like the domain architect, is
typically in an oversight position, rather than being an active project team member.
Enterprise architects are frequently responsible for strategies, roadmaps, reference
architectures, and patterns that project teams are expected to implement and utilize.
Therefore, enterprise architects are clearly well-positioned to provide governance. A
reference architecture or design pattern is nothing more than a collection of policies
that ensure solutions are built the appropriate way.
Enterprise architects that are more focused on technology architecture are
responsible for the infrastructure strategy. Earlier in the book, a number of
alternatives were presented for implementing policy-driven infrastructure. If
enterprise architecture handles technology architecture, then it is their responsibility
to set the direction in this space. This also includes ensuring that application teams
use the infrastructure properly. This is an especially important concern in the SOA
space primarily due to the emergence of the Enterprise Service Bus. No two ESBs
are alike, as products marketed as an ESB come from EAI (Enterprise Application
Integration) technology, MOM (Message-Oriented Middleware) technology,
network appliances, and even products that are built from scratch. It is up to the
enterprise architect to provide clarity on how an ESB should be utilized, if even at
all. One of the questions that SOA governance must address is how to ensure that
services are built the right way; clearly, the policies that ensure this behavior are the
domain of the enterprise architect.
Enterprise architects that have business architecture responsibilities have an even
larger role in the SOA governance efforts. The second major question is how to
ensure the right services get built, and as discussed in Chapter 5, the key is business
architecture and the creation of appropriate business domain models, possibly
including business process models or business capability maps. The enterprise
architect that is focused on business architecture has a role in performing the analysis
and incorporating the business strategy into these business domain models that
ultimately will be used in the project definition process to ensure the right services
get built.
Information Architect
The information architect is a role that sometimes may get overlooked in
SOA governance. A key challenge in adopting SOA is striving for consistent
representations of information on service messages. Frequently, information
architects may not be involved in this discussion because the conversation is
typically between developers or solution architects. As a result, the representation
of the information may be rooted in the processing models of the service consumers
and service provider. This is neither good nor bad, but it does not take into
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Establishing SOA Governance at Your Organization
[ 168 ]
account any storage model of the information, or any work that may be done by
an information governance council in trying to define a canonical model or
data dictionary.
In order for an organization to strive for consistency in the representation of
information, it is important to include information architecture in the SOA
governance efforts for service design, specifically in providing context for defining
the schemas of the service messages.
Security Architect
The security architect is the role associated with ensuring that the technology
solutions of the company take appropriate measures to protect its sensitive
information, whether for protection of intellectual property, or for privacy protection
related to the information maintained by the company. It is very likely that security
architects are already involved with governance, whether it is part of broad IT
governance related to Sarbanes-Oxley, or more exclusively focused on
security policies.
One key area of focus for the security architect with regards to SOA governance is
the role of identity in service interactions. Run-time governance techniques, such as
traffic shaping/request throttling, are completely dependent on having identity of
the consumer. As the degree of interactions between services increases, determining
exactly what identity should be passed through these interactions is a challenge, and
one that will require the guidance of your security architects.
IT Manager
The role of the typical IT manager is to manage personnel, manage work, and
manage budget. This role is absolutely critical to the success of the SOA, because the
changes that can be achieved have the most impact on IT management. Developers
will still be writing code, but managers will have their entire world changed. IT
managers that previously had complete control over their applications now may be
dependent on other IT managers, or have other IT managers dependent on them.
While most organizations are already dealing with this when it comes to infrastructure
dependencies, many are not dealing with application-to-application dependencies.
If we look significantly forward, a successful SOA adoption can lead to significant
organizational changes. IT managers may be reluctant to embrace this change as
they may feel that their power is being taken away from them. Upper management
tends to remain stable, and the people working in the trenches will still be doing
analysis, project management, or development, but middle management has no
such guarantees.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 8
[ 169 ]
In order to mitigate this risk, it is important that IT management, specifically
the middle managers, take an active role in the early decisions around
service ownership.
Service Manager/Owner
The service manager, also known as the service owner, is a new role to most
organizations, although if your organization has adopted ITIL and ITSM, you
may have some familiarity with the concepts, but focused on services provided
by IT operations. The service manager is the person responsible for managing the
relationships with service consumers, scheduling and executing the upcoming
releases of the service, and establishing relationships and service contracts with
new consumers.
The service manager plays a key role in ensuring proper run-time governance is
in place. Ultimately, the service manager, as the name suggests, is responsible for
the service that is provided to the consumers, and the last thing needed is to have
a service outage. The service manager must ensure that all details of the service
contract have been established and that the infrastructure has been properly
configured to enforce the policies within the service contract.
Initially, service managers may come from IT, but it is entirely possible that service
managers may also be placed outside of IT, especially where services are exposed to
external partners.
Platform Manager
The platform manager is responsible for the technology platform where services
(and consumers, for internal consumers) are hosted. For most organizations that do
not have the role of service manager defined, it falls to the operations team, whether
an individual engineer or team or their associated manager to ensure that no outages
occur in production.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Establishing SOA Governance at Your Organization
[ 170 ]
Even when an organization does have a service manager role, the platform
manager is still responsible for the underlying platforms, effectively providing
a hosting service for the solutions that are deployed on them, whether those
solutions represent service consumers or service providers. An individual service
manager is primarily concerned about their service, and may not be watching
the entire platform. Furthermore, for a service that involves several systems in its
implementation, multiple platform managers may be involved, while the service
manager is still responsible for the end-to-end performance of the entire service
implementation across all systems, as illustrated by the following diagram:
Service A
Manager Service B
Manager
Service A
Automated
Process
(Web Service)
Orchestration Platform
Service A
Java EE
Component
Service B
Web Service
Application Server
Service A
Legacy
Component
Service A
ERP
Component
Service B
ERP
Component
Mainframe ERP System
ERP
Platform
Manager
App Server
Platform
Manager
BPEL
Platform
Manager
Mainframe
Platform
Manager
In this diagram, Service A is comprised of components that run on an orchestration
platform (BPEL engine), an application server, a mainframe, and an ERP system. The
manager for Service A must be concerned with the end-to-end performance across
the platforms. Service B is comprised of a Web Service hosted on the application
server platform and an ERP component. The manager for Service B is concerned with
these two components. In contrast, each of these platforms has a platform manager
that is concerned with the overall performance of the platform and each component
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 8
[ 171 ]
running on it. The manager of the application server platform is concerned about
the performance and capacity of the application server platform and must watch the
performance of the Java EE component of Service A, and the web service of Service
B, but is otherwise unconcerned about the remaining components that constitute
Service A and Service B.
The platform manager is involved with establishing the entry criteria in order for a
component to be deployed on a platform in a production environment. For example,
if it is determined that a service did not use the appropriate instrumentation
framework to allow for operational monitoring, it should not be allowed to go into
production, since it can put the entire platform at risk.
Other Stakeholders
Besides the individuals already mentioned, there are other stakeholders that will
play a role in your SOA governance efforts. While the majority of the technical
governance issues are covered by the existing roles that have been identified, there
are additional roles that may be involved with the non-technical governance. These
individuals are likely already involved with your normal IT governance efforts,
such as members of review boards that approve capital expenditures and project
requests. Rather than forming additional committees designed to be involved in the
governance process, it is better to ensure that the desired behaviors and goals for
SOA are factored into the existing governance process.
Organizing Your People
There are many different organizational approaches that can be leveraged for your
SOA governance efforts. SOA adoption is an enterprise initiative, however, which
creates a challenge. Of the roles mentioned, only the Enterprise Architect, the
Information Architect, and the Security Architect normally operate at the enterprise
level. The remaining roles are either focused on project activities, on segments of
technology, or on segments of the business. At the same time, many Enterprise
Architectures are heavily focused on the underlying technology platforms, and
may not have the appropriate functional knowledge to contribute to defining the
functional boundaries associated with SOA adoption. As was shown in the Advasco
story, both the technology architecture and the functional architecture are key
aspects of SOA. Information architects are similar to enterprise architects in that
they have broad visibility, but in a narrow area; in this case, the data systems of the
enterprise. A similar story holds true for security architects.
Given the plethora of roles available, but the lack of the right role, it is important that
the organization determine an approach to ensuring a successful adoption of SOA.
There are a variety of different techniques that can be used.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Establishing SOA Governance at Your Organization
[ 172 ]
Enterprise Architecture Driven
In this approach, the responsibility for SOA adoption lies solely within the enterprise
architecture team. This can be a very good fit for many of the project governance
concerns, and even some of the run-time governance concerns, since Enterprise
Architecture is frequently tasked with driving strategic technologies into the
enterprise. If your Enterprise Architecture team is also responsible for business
architecture, then it is in an even stronger position, as it can also handle many of the
pre-project governance concerns. The risk, however, is that technology is just a small
part of SOA. The greater challenge is the cultural changes both in the way projects
are defined and the way they are built. This can be a much more difficult task for
Enterprise Architecture, since they are not normally in the management hierarchy
with the people who will be most impacted by SOA adoption.
Enterprise
Architect
Information
Architect
Security
Architect
Enterprise Architecture
Technical
Lead
Platform
Manager IT Manager
Solution
Architect
Business
Analyst
Service
Manager
Two key relationships that can be a good litmus test before embracing an Enterprise
Architecture driven SOA effort is the relationship with key IT managers, including
the ability to influence organizational issues, and the relationship with key business
leaders, especially those responsible for business strategy and architecture. If the
Enterprise Architecture team is responsible for business architecture, chances are
even better that they can drive the effort.
Another factor is the current role of Enterprise Architecture in the educational and
governance processes that already exist in the enterprise. If the organization is used
to taking direction and learning from Enterprise Architecture, this is a good thing. If
the enterprise architects already play a role in the governance process for software
development, whether through formal reviews or through less formal project
engagements, again, it is not a big stretch to have them include enforcement of some
of the SOA policies in their existing activities.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 8
[ 173 ]
One risk associated with the Enterprise Architecture driven approach is the number
of resources that can be dedicated to the effort. While one or more members of the
EA group may be dedicated (or partially dedicated) to the effort, they need support
from members of other organizations to participate in the effort. Another risk is in
the area of run-time governance. An enterprise architect is normally not involved
with the run-time management of production solutions. As a result, they are not
as well-positioned to provide guidance on the right way to manage the services.
Given the strong technology backgrounds of many enterprise architects, however,
they usually have excellent relationships with the operational staff that allows for
appropriate influence.
Center of Excellence/Competency Center
In this approach, the responsibility for SOA adoption is given to a cross-functional
team of people. This has advantages, since it can draw from all areas of the
organization and can include as many of the roles associated with SOA governance
as desired. There are two factors that can have a large influence in the success of a
Center of Excellence: the composition of the team and the engagement model with
the organization.
SOA
Center of
Excellence
Enterprise
Architect
Information
Architect
Security
Architect
Technical
Lead
Platform
Manager
IT Manager
Solution
Architect
Business
Analyst
Service
Manager
The composition of the team is the first decision that must be made by the
organization. As with any virtual team, a common mistake is to choose people who
have time to participate rather than choosing people who should be participating.
Just as with the Enterprise Architecture driven approach, it is important that the
people chosen for the Center of Excellence have the ability to influence the rest of the
organization. Choose people that will struggle trying to influence others, and there's
a good chance that the entire SOA effort will struggle as well.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Establishing SOA Governance at Your Organization
[ 174 ]
The second factor is the engagement model with the rest of the organization.
While a permanent organization like Enterprise Architecture may already have a
defined engagement model with projects, a new virtual team does not. There are
many nuances to the Center of Excellence that must be examined. First, what is the
team's purpose? Is it to communicate a message about SOA and educate the rest of
the organization? If this is the only focus, there is a risk that the effort will become
disconnected from the projects that are realizing the organization's SOA. If the
Center of Excellence tries to remain connected by participating on projects, how will
that occur? At a minimum, the Center of Excellence can act as a reviewer for projects.
A second option is to act as a staffing center for the projects. This is a common
approach for Competency Centers, where a goal of the group is to train other staff
members by working alongside them. This works well for the more technical areas
of SOA, such as teaching staff how to work with XML or Web Services, but it may
not be as practical for the non-technical aspects. A third approach is to act as an
outsourcing center for service development. This approach has benefits in that the
development of key services can be separated from the projects that identified the
need, allowing them to be developed in a way that benefits a broader audience.
The inherent risk with this approach is that the Center of Excellence may not have
the domain knowledge of the functional areas necessary to develop the services
properly. Once again, it is likely that a team can be formed with the necessary
technical skills, but it is far more difficult to staff a team with the necessary functional
knowledge. Furthermore, it is not possible for a small, centralized team to own all
services in the organization. Eventually, this approach will not scale. Your goal must
be to establish service development and service integration as a standard capability
of the entire organization, not just one team.
A successful approach for a Center of Excellence is to initially focus heavily on
communication and education, along with providing some amount of resources
that assist in staffing initial projects. Rather than have work outsourced to them,
they provide staff to projects that can train other people, ensure compliance of the
SOA governance policies within those projects, and also bring back feedback to the
Center of Excellence on policies that encountered resistance or were problematic to
implement. Over time, the need to be a staffing center will go away, but the need for
SOA governance will not. The Center of Excellence must still be a source of policies,
an arbitrator when policies are conflicting or confusing, a source of consulting for
decision guidance, continued education and communication on the SOA efforts,
and finally, the group that is measuring the efforts of the organization against the
desired behavior and making whatever adjustments are necessary. Eventually, if
the organization achieves the desired behavior, the need for the Center of Excellence
may go away, as the behavior that they helped encourage has now become second
nature for the organization.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 8
[ 175 ]
Review Boards
Another approach to SOA governance focuses exclusively on the enforcement
of the policies that have been outlined through the use of review boards. Many
organizations already have formal review processes in place; therefore it makes some
sense to extend the policies enforced by the existing review boards.
For example, it is very likely that your organization already has a review board that
approves projects. This review board may currently focus on the financial side of
the proposed projects in making their approval decisions. That review board can
now factor in the business domain models to determine the architectural fit of the
proposed project in addition to the financials of the proposal. This may require
adding members to the approval process that are familiar with the architectural side
of the equation, or it may require educating the existing members on the importance
of the domain models.
The same thing holds true for architectural reviews and design reviews. The
challenge for these reviews is the opposite of the project approval review. In that
review, we needed to augment the process and optionally the people to take more
technical issues into account. In the case of architectural and design reviews, the
review board likely already covers many of technical issues, but is not properly
positioned to handle organizational issues or scoping issues that may arise from
applying the policies to the projects.
The biggest challenge with this approach to SOA governance, however, is that there
are significant gaps. First, who is responsible for establishing policies in the first
place? More often than not, review boards are responsible for enforcing policies but
don't normally set them. At best, they may make decisions on the fly where policies
don't exist, but even then, the reasons for the decision are unlikely to turn into
official policy. In order to address this gap, some other authority in the organization
must establish the policies that are enforced by the review boards. This will likely be
an existing organization like Enterprise Architecture or a cross-functional group like
a Center of Excellence.
Common Challenges
Regardless of the organizational approach chosen, there are several challenges that
must be factored into your decisions around your organizational approach. The
first is the risk of focusing too much on enforcement, and not enough on education
on what the desired behavior is. When people don't understand the reasons why
policies exist, they are likely to resist them when they see them as getting in the way
of their responsibilities. When educated on the reason for the policies and the desired
outcome that they are intended to achieve, they are more likely to be compliant
with the policies. As stated earlier, the easiest way to achieve compliance is to make
compliance the path of least resistance.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Establishing SOA Governance at Your Organization
[ 176 ]
The second challenge is in picking governance processes that are inconsistent
with the existing culture of the organization. If your organization is very
consensus driven, an enforcement process that places extensive power in the
hands of a few, such as with a review board, can be very risky. A strong focus on
education, allowing key members to influence and persuade others in the process
that establishes consensus may be easier for the organization to digest. If your
organization is accustomed to a command-and-control structure, then yielding
power to a few individuals and giving them authority to stop projects in their tracks
may be possible. This is not to say, however, that matching the existing culture is
always a good thing. Sometimes, the existing culture may be the biggest problem.
Remember, SOA governance is about achieving a desired behavior in your SOA
adoption efforts, and it is very likely that the desired behavior is different from what
you are doing today. If the culture needs dramatic change, then dramatic changes
in governance may be required. Frequently, however, this may require a change
in leadership. It is typically very difficult for existing leadership to make dramatic
changes in the behavior of an organization.
The next challenge is remaining relevant. A Center of Excellence is not the only
approach that must be concerned about the engagement model with the rest of the
organization. Enterprise Architecture is commonly at risk of becoming an ivory
tower if they do not remain engaged with project activities. A review board is at
even more risk, since they normally may not even meet with each other except when
reviews are occurring. The team establishing policies must remain engaged with the
teams that are expected to be compliant with those policies. An approach that strives
to educate and mentor first, and then reviews and accepts/rejects second is more
likely to be accepted, and more likely to have a higher compliance rate.
The final challenge is in matching the needs of all areas of the organization. While
smaller companies may be able to have a single approach to SOA, larger companies
with multiple lines of business may have different desired behaviors for each line
of business. For example, if a company is focused on rapid growth in one line of
business, but cost containment in another line of business, embracing policies that
require company-wide standardization may help the second line of business cut their
costs, but may severely restrict the ability of the first line of business to grow rapidly.
Preferably, these goals are captured in the business domain models, however, they
might not always be, or more likely, the domain models may not exist until further
down the SOA journey. SOA must be business driven, and the behaviors, policies,
and processes all must be reflective of those business goals.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 8
[ 177 ]
Policies
The second piece of SOA governance is policies. Policies are the standards and
guidelines that guide the staff associated with SOA towards the desired behavior.
There are three key timeframes that have been addressed in the book:
1. During the processes associated with determining what IT projects to fund
and execute: These processes are frequently associated with the broader
subject of IT governance. While SOA governance should not introduce new
governance processes associated with deciding what projects to fund and
execute, policies associated with SOA governance should be included in the
criteria. Surprisingly, vendors that offer tools in the SOA governance space
do not have a term for this timeframe. We will refer to this as pre-project
governance.
2. During project execution: In the vendor community, this is frequently
referred to as design-time governance, however, the scope of SOA
governance is certainly broader than just the design activities of a project. We
will refer to this as project governance.
3. During the operation of production systems: In the vendor community and
in this book, this timeframe is referred to as run-time governance. As long
as there are services running in your production systems, there is a need to
govern the interactions between consumers and providers.
Pre-Project Governance
During this timeframe, the desired behavior is centered on a simple concept:
building the right thing. The decision-making process that results in an approved
and funded project is what sets the initial scope for the effort. This initial scope has
a significant impact in determining the artifacts that will be produced. If the scope
incorporates an enterprise viewpoint appropriately, an organization may quickly
build up a library of services whose expectations for reuse and agility in times of
change have been well thought out. If the scope does not incorporate enterprise
viewpoints and needs appropriately, it creates a risk that the artifacts developed will
struggle to provide value outside of the initial project.
Artifacts
In order to perform pre-project governance, the following artifacts are recommended:
Organization Chart
Business Domain/Capability Models
Business Process Models
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Establishing SOA Governance at Your Organization
[ 178 ]
Application Portfolio
Service Portfolio
Organization
Chart
Business Domain /
Capability Models
Business
Process Models
Application
Portfolio
Service
Portfolio
Funding Ownership Service
Decisions
The first artifact, the Organization Chart, is a key element in how projects get
defined. Normally, relationships with areas of the business outside of IT are highly
influenced by the organization of the IT department. Change the organization of the
IT department and you may change the way relationships are formed and managed
with the rest of the business. The same also holds true with the organization of the
rest of the business. Change the organizational structure of the business, and it's
likely that the IT organizational structure will change with it.
The reason why the organizational chart is so critical is because there is normally
a direct relationship between budget and organization. If a particular department
in the business is in control of their own budget, it could be a big barrier to either
creating services that will be used by other departments, or in using services that
are managed by other departments. In the first scenario, many budget owners may
want other organizations to contribute to the cost of development or maintenance
of services if they use them. In the second scenario, they may be asked by those
organizations to contribute to their costs. In addition, the projects that are proposed
may have dependencies that other organizations must deliver in order to be
successful. Depending on the state of relationships in the organization, this could be
a major hurdle to overcome.
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 8
[ 179 ]
The thing to remember when adopting SOA is that it will likely put pressure on the
existing organizational structure. If it doesn't, there are number of possibilities. First,
your organization may already be aligned along the concept of service consumers
and service providers. Second, your organization may not let organizational
boundaries get in the way of doing the right thing. Finally, it may be that your SOA
efforts are working too much within the boundaries of the organization and not
really creating the type of change possible with SOA.
The next three artifacts, Business Domain/Capability Models, Business Process
Models, and the Application Portfolio are closely related. These are analysis
artifacts that should be used to guide the decisions on what services should be
created. At a minimum, as discussed in the Advasco example, some form of
domain/capability models and business processes models should be leveraged.
Business process models on their own create a risk for creating process silos; just
as many organizations today have application silos based upon their application
portfolios. When business process models and application portfolios are combined
with a domain/capability model, the resulting combination can be a powerful tool in
guiding the decisions on what services should be established.
The final artifact, the Service Portfolio, is frequently a catalog of services that have
been built and are available in production, but it is much more powerful when it
is used as a planning tool. When the organization has taken the time to perform
business process analysis and business domain/capability analysis, an outcome
should be the definition of key services that the organization needs to create to fully
leverage SOA.
Policies for Pre-Project Governance
The following are questions or policies that you should consider in your pre-project
governance efforts:
Has the proposed project identified candidate services?
Has the proposed project mapped candidate services to the business domains
as represented in the business domain/capability models?
Has the proposed project reviewed the service portfolio against the list of
candidate services?
Has an appropriate team of project stakeholders been identified based upon
candidate services?
Has the proposed program/project been appropriately structured and
scheduled to properly manage the development and integration of new and
existing services?
•
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Establishing SOA Governance at Your Organization
[ 180 ]
Have all funding details been determined based upon the services proposed
and the organizations involved?
Does the roadmap include the development of services with high potential
for reuse?
Are projects encouraged to reuse existing services, where appropriate, based
upon the business domain models and business objectives?
Are projects allowed to create redundancies, where appropriate, based upon
the business domain models and business objectives?
Have existing systems been taken into account in the definition of the
proposed services?
Is the organizational structure being reviewed on a regular basis based upon
continued service analysis?
Does the organization have a clear approach to resolving service
ownership models?
Are business processes properly leveraging services?
Does your service portfolio properly account for any globalization impact?
Does the service portfolio properly account for any planned areas for growth
by acquisition?
Remember, this phase is the key timeframe to ensure that the organization builds
the right services. If the decisions on what services to build are not investigated until
after projects have been defined and funded, constraints will already exist that can be
an impediment to building the right services.
Project Governance
During this timeframe, there are two major concerns: building the right services and
building those services the right way. While the pre-project governance efforts are
supposed to focus on building the right services, all too often, the proper artifacts
are not available to make the necessary decisions at the time projects are approved.
As a result, the necessary analysis and the decisions associated with the project
architecture are performed within the project itself. This creates some risk, because
the project does establish constraints that may get challenged by the results of
analysis and architecture.
Like the architecture decisions that are made prior to project approval, the
architecture and design activities must incorporate enterprise viewpoints and needs
appropriately. For this purpose, the artifacts and policies mentioned as part of the
pre-project governance all still apply. Besides these concerns, this timeframe is where
an organization must ensure that services are built the right way.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 8
[ 181 ]
Artifacts
In order to perform project governance, the following artifacts, besides those already
mentioned in the pre-project governance section, are recommended:
Service Technology Reference Architecture
Service Security Reference Architecture
Service Blueprints and Frameworks
Standard Information Models and Schemas
Service
Technology
Reference
Architecture
Service
Security
Reference
Architecture
Service
Blueprints
and
Frameworks
Service
Information
Models and
Schemas
These artifacts are only the ones that have an impact on SOA governance. Clearly,
there are many other artifacts that are associated with general development
governance, but those that are not specific to service development and integration
are outside of the scope of this book.
Service Technology Reference Architecture
The first artifact is the Service Technology Reference Architecture. The purpose of
this artifact is to ensure that the appropriate technologies are used for the service
being developed. The document should first define the appropriate service types
for the organization and then map those types to specific service technologies. The
document should never have more than one type mapping to the same set of specific
service technologies. If multiple types map to the same set of service technologies,
it may create more confusion than clarity. While those service types may be useful
in determining service ownership, this document is focused on determining service
technologies. On the flip side of things, enterprises with centralized infrastructure
will also want to ensure that there is only one set of service technologies for each
service type. For example, there will always be a catchall type, like "General Business
Service" that will map to an application server and its associated service framework.
Is it good to have both a .NET platform running on Windows Server and a Java EE
application server running on a Linux platform? The correct answer is it depends. If
your organization was a Microsoft development shop, but then acquired another
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Establishing SOA Governance at Your Organization
[ 182 ]
company that was a Java development shop, it may make sense to have two general
business service platforms. If both these groups still maintain their own data centers
and operations staff after acquisition, there aren't too many issues. If, instead, the
acquisition results in a consolidation of data centers and reduction in operational staff,
justifying the continued operation of both platforms will be much more difficult.
Here are some service types that you should consider. Each one has the potential for
being mapped to a specific set of service technologies.
Composite Services: These are services that are built by combining the
output of two or more services, and aggregating the respective responses into
a single response.
Automated (Orchestrated) Processes: These are services that are built by
executing a fully automated sequence of actions as represented in a graphical
process model. Technically speaking, a composite service is normally a
specialized case of an orchestrated process, but if you choose to leverage very
specific technologies for narrow service types, it is possible that you may
need to define both service types and their associated service platform and
technologies.
Integration Services: These are services whose whole purpose is to service
enable some system that does not support the standards required to speak
natively to service consumers.
Presentation Services: These are services that provide information in a
presentation-friendly format. They don't actually produce the end user
interface, but they provide the information in such a way that it is easily
consumed by user interface technologies. This may require a slight variation
of the standard service platform.
Management Services: These are services that expose management and
administrative functionality. In the past, there have been management-specific
technologies including SMNP and JMX. Today, there are increasing numbers
of products that expose management interfaces as SOAP or XML/HTTP
interfaces, however, the use of SMNP and JMX are still far more prevalent.
Information Services: These are services that are used to retrieve information
from a variety of data sources, aggregating the results into a single response.
Vendors typically market solutions in this space as data service platforms
or data integration platforms. These services differ from composite services
in that they are specifically designed to talk only to data sources on the back
end, rather than any arbitrary web service.
Content Subscription Services: These are services that provide content
feeds, typically adhering to feed syndication standards such as RSS
and ATOM.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 8
[ 183 ]
General Business Services: This is the catchall category for any service that
doesn't fit into any of the other categories.
When mapping these service types to technologies, the following things must
be considered:
Service Platform: The technology decisions start with an underlying hosting
platform. Typical choices include a Java Application Server, Windows Server,
a Data Integration/Services Platform, a BPEL-based orchestration platform,
and some ESB offerings.
Service Communication Technology: The communication technologies are
the protocol used to interact with the service. This includes both the message
format used, such as POX, SOAP, or RSS, and the underlying message
transport (HTTP, WebSphere MQ, or Tibco JMS).
For example, using the service types listed, a mapping to service platforms and
communication technologies could look like this:
Service Type
General
Business
Service
Automated
Process
Content
Subscription
Service
Information
Service
Presentation
Service
Management
Service
Service Communication Technology
Service Platform
SOAP Service
SOAP Service
SOAP Service
Application Server
Application Server
Application Server
BPEL Engine
RSS Feed
Data Integration Platform
REST JSON
JMX SNMP WS-Management
Any Platform
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Establishing SOA Governance at Your Organization
[ 184 ]
Beyond the mapping of service types to service technologies, the service reference
architecture must also address policies associated with the message itself that go
beyond the core communication technology. This can include naming conventions
for URLs, namespace conventions for the XML messages, references to a
canonical model, or more. It must also provide policies on how the non-functional
capabilities associated with services interactions will be provided by the underlying
infrastructure. This includes:
Security (see Service Security Reference Architecture)
Routing and load balancing
Transport and mediation
High availability and failover
Monitoring and management
Versioning and transformations
These non-functional capabilities are a key aspect of SOA, because they are the
foundation of run-time governance. At the same time, they must be factored into the
design-time decisions, because if the development teams don't utilize the technology
appropriately, the ability to enforce run-time governance policies will disappear.
If a team chooses to build its own security implementation or hard code rules for
versioning into the implementation, it will likely require a code change and the
associated release process to implement and enforce the policies in a service contract
for a new consumer, increasing the time and effort required to bring new consumers
online. We want to strive to implement these non-functional capabilities through
policy-driven infrastructure that is configured, rather than coded.
Service
Consumer
Policy-Driven
Infrastructure
Service
Provider
Routing
Load Balancing
Traffic Shaping
Security
Transport Mediation
Transformation
Monitoring
Logging
•
•
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 8
[ 185 ]
Service Security Reference Architecture
The next artifact is the Service Security Reference Architecture. This can be
included as a subset of the Service Technology Reference Architecture, or created as
a standalone artifact. Regardless of the approach, there are two questions that must
be answered by the reference architecture:
1. What security policies must be enforced?
2. What technologies are used for enforcing those policies?
The first question must guide the developers of services and their consumers on
security policies for authentication, authorization, encryption, digital signatures, and
threat prevention.
There are two components to authentication. The first is a simple policy that
states whether or not identity is required on all service invocations. It is strongly
recommended that this is the case. With this policy in place, your organization must
then specify what constitutes identity. It can be a user's name, an application's name,
a company's name, or any combination of them. It may include additional attributes
such as group membership or more. The one thing it should not be is anonymous.
Companies must assume that in the future many services will comprise a particular
interaction, with multiple teams involved. If identity on messages does not exist,
it makes it extremely difficult to enforce run-time governance, since identity is
what ties an interaction back to a service contract, as well as making the debugging
process much more costly should problems occur in production.
With this identity specified, the next step is to decide when authentication is
required on service invocations. Unlike a web application that faces an end user, one
cannot assume that a simple challenge can be issued to allow a consumer to specify
credentials on demand. When dealing with system-to-system interactions, it is very
unlikely that the service consumer has access to the password of the user associated
with the current thread. If passwords are not issued, then there needs to be a way to
ensure that the credentials passed on the request have not been forged. For internal
consumers, many organizations choose to only validate that credentials are from a
trusted source, rather than performing an authentication on every request. This, of
course, assumes that an authentication was performed at the user interface of
the system.
Authorization, on the other hand, should always be performed on all service
requests. Besides stating this policy, the reference architecture must also cover
whether role-based or user-based authorization will be leveraged. Role-based
authorization is generally preferred, as the management of policies associated with
individual users can quickly become an impossible task for large organizations.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Establishing SOA Governance at Your Organization
[ 186 ]
At first glance, you may first think that encryption is only concerned with the
protection of sensitive data from systems that have no need for accessing it, but the
certificate exchange associated with bi-directional SSL communications can also be
leveraged to ensure that service endpoints only accept connections from authorized
points on the network. For example, if you are leveraging an XML appliance as
a policy enforcement point, it is possible for a rogue consumer to circumvent the
appliance by entering the hostname or IP address of the service endpoint directly.
By forcing a bi-directional certificate exchange between the XML appliance and the
service endpoint in order to exchange service messages, these rogue consumers
would be prevented from accessing the service, since they would not have the
certificate required.
Digital signatures are a means of ensuring that the service messages have not been
modified en route. While this is typically not used with internal consumers, it is
frequently used when dealing with external consumers or external service providers,
especially when those requests are sent over the open Internet. It may also be
required on internal messages to ensure that some portion of the message, such as
identity credentials, is coming from a trusted source.
Finally, threat protection is concerned with preventing consumers from exploiting
a variety of techniques that can compromise the security of the service provider.
Common examples include checking for SQL injection or detecting harmful XML
messages, such as ones that are compliant with the XML schemas involved, but
exploit recursion or buffer overflows to attempt to crash the server that will process
the message.
The second question deals with the specific technologies associated with enforcing
those policies. This begins with the service messages themselves. While the reference
architecture has previously specified what constitutes identity, it must now say
how that identity is represented on service messages. Will it be issued in plain text
in a standard location? Will it be specified using transport-specific mechanisms (for
example, HTTP headers) or as part of the actual message payload? The most flexible
mechanism available today is only associated with SOAP messages, and that is the
WS-Security framework. This framework establishes a standard location in the SOAP
header for credentials, and provides a framework for specifying profiles that allow
different token types to be used. Standard profiles include the Username profile
(simple plaintext and hashed credentials), the SAML (Security Assertion Markup
Language) Token Profile, the X.509 Token Profile, the Kerberos Token Profile, and
the REL (Rights Expression Language) Token Profile. Not all products support all
of the profiles, so be sure to dig deeper when a product claims to have WS-Security
support. It may only support one or two of the token profiles, or potentially none at
all, since WS-Security also specifies standard ways of handling message encryption
and digital signatures.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 8
[ 187 ]
Once the policies for the messages themselves have been set, the reference
architecture must address the specific infrastructure associated with the enforcement
of those policies. Will a standalone gateway, such as some ESBs or an XML
appliance, be used to enforce authorization policies? If so, then all service traffic must
be routed through those gateways, and techniques must be leveraged to prevent
rogue consumers from circumventing those gateways. While a policy may say that
SAML assertions must be used, how does a developer of a service consumer place
those assertions on a message? Are they responsible for writing the code to do so, or
will a framework be provided for them? If a framework is used, must the developer
explicitly reference it, or will the insertion of credentials happen implicitly? The
security reference architecture must provide enough information so that the
developers of a service consumer or service provider know exactly what is required
of them in their coding efforts versus what must be simply configured as part of
establishing a service contract.
Service Blueprints and Frameworks
When trying to guide people to the desired behavior, a very powerful technique
is to simply give them examples of it. This is the role of service blueprints. The
reference architectures discussed can contain a large number of policies that can
seem daunting to a developer, creating the risk that they get ignored. By creating
blueprints that show a common pattern, and preferably the simplicity associated
with following the pattern, developers are more likely to follow the guidelines.
For example, if your organization will be exposing external services, a challenge
may be the propagation of identity to back-end systems, since identity checks may
occur in a DMZ or through federation, yet the back-end services have no access to
those identity stores. A blueprint can be created that demonstrates how that original
identity flows through the connections required, and what code is required at each
step (if any) to ensure it happens.
Blueprints also provide a convenient way of demonstrating how to choose within
alternate strategies for a given service type. For example, a general business
service may be accessible by either asynchronous messaging via message-oriented
middleware, or via a synchronous messaging approach over HTTP. When should
one be used over the other, and what are the differences in how to leverage them?
The second key piece of this artifact is service frameworks. While the underlying
service platforms typically include frameworks for doing HTTP communication,
XML message processing, and SOAP processing, it doesn't mean it's easy to use.
This is especially true for security. While many frameworks can construct a SOAP
message through the use of a wizard or code generator and one or two lines of code,
adding a SAML assertion to that SOAP message can be much more complicated. A
common theme with governance is that if you make compliance the path of least
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Establishing SOA Governance at Your Organization
[ 188 ]
resistance, you're more likely to get compliance. If you have a policy that all service
messages must contain identity, providing a framework so this can be done in one or
two lines of code, or zero if possible, will ensure that your developers are compliant
with the policy, versus requiring them to research SAML libraries and write many
lines of code to make it happen.
Standard Information Models and Schemas
The final artifacts that are imperative for design-time governance are standard
information models and schemas. A common goal associated with SOA is reuse, but
reuse becomes much more difficult when common information is not represented
consistently. For example, if there are two services that both need to deal with
Account information, but both services represent that information in different ways,
any consumer that needs to use both of those services must now implement logic
that translates between the two definitions of Account.
In order to prevent this situation from becoming rampant, an organization must
take this decision out of the hands of individual projects, and put it into the hands
of a group with broader focus, whether that is the entire enterprise, or some larger
domain. It is important that this group (or groups) understands that the goal is
not to come up with the one universal representation that everyone agrees on,
because odds are it doesn't exist. Rather, the goal is to minimize the number of
representations for common information. If it can be one, that's the optimal point, but
if it winds up being three or four, and we provide mechanisms for easily translating
between them that is a big improvement over leaving it in the hands of every
individual service consumer or service provider.
One factor that can play a key role in defining these models is the existence of
industry standards for the information domains involved. For example, there are
many messaging standards that exist for various verticals, such as financial services
(SWIFT, ISO-20022), healthcare (HIPAA), and insurance (ACORD), which have been
created for the explicit purpose of information exchange in business-to-business
interactions. These schemas can be an excellent starting point for establishing
internal standards, and should definitely be leveraged when exposing services
externally. A second factor is the organization's use of third-party solutions, such as
a major ERP product like SAP or Oracle. These systems often come with information
schemas pre-packaged. The more customization to these schemas that you do, the
more difficult it may be to upgrade that infrastructure. As a result, these schemas
may also be a good starting point for establishing your own standards. The best
scenario is where an industry standard exists that is independent of any thirdparty application, but supported by those third-party applications. That maintains
independence from the vendor solution, yet leverages a schema with broad adoption
in the industry.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 8
[ 189 ]
Just as with the security reference architecture, the information models and
schemas must make sure that they not only provide the standard models, but
sufficient instructions on how to utilize them in service traffic. For example, if there
was a common XML schema file for Account information called account.xsd,
organizations should not allow individual projects to copy that file into their own
projects. Rather, their projects should reference that schema file from some location
that will be universally available. That allows the schema to be maintained and
updated centrally, rather than having to go out to each individual project and update
the Account definition one at a time.
Policies for Project Governance
The following are questions/policies that you should consider in your project
governance efforts, in addition to all those that were specified in the pre-project
governance if not enforced at that time:
Have all services been mapped to an appropriate type?
Are the service technologies chosen for each service consistent with the type
to technology mapping specified in the reference architecture?
Does the service use the standard communication technologies specified in
the reference architecture?
Does the service interface comply with all naming conventions for URLs as
specified in the reference architecture?
Does the service interface comply with all namespace conventions as
specified in the reference architecture?
Does the service interface properly reference all external schema definitions,
rather than copying them locally?
Does the service interface use the standard schema definitions properly?
Do external facing services only expose industry standard schemas, where
they exist?
Is the service interface compliant with industry standards, such as WS-I?
Does the service require identity on its messages?
Are all service consumers properly specifying identity on outgoing requests?
Have appropriate authorization policies been established for the service?
Is the service communication infrastructure being leveraged appropriately?
Are all internal consumers properly leveraging the standard
service frameworks?
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Establishing SOA Governance at Your Organization
[ 190 ]
Are all internal providers properly leveraging the standard service
frameworks?
Is all sensitive information properly encrypted according to the service
security policies?
Have service contracts been established between all consumers
and providers?
Are all aspects of the service contract fully specified including message
schemas, versions, delivery schedule, points of contact, and expected
usage rates?
Have all services been thoroughly and adequately tested, with testing
results available to service consumers, if required by the service contract?
For internal consumers, testing results should always be available to help
counter the natural tendency for developers to resist using things they didn't
personally write.
Have service managers been assigned for all new services?
Are the service boundaries identified in the solution consistent with the
business domain models?
Has the solution incorporated existing services appropriately?
Has the solution properly published information about new services into the
Service Registry/Repository?
Has the solution avoided creating redundant services that were not
appropriate according to the business domain models?
Remember that all of these policies are in addition to policies that are already being
enforced as part of your normal project governance process. Policies around coding
conventions, project structures, code repositories, unit testing, integration testing,
performance and capacity testing, and so on still apply.
Run-time Governance
During this timeframe, the major concern is the correct behavior of service
consumers and service providers so that the infrastructure remains operational
and in a healthy state at all times. There are two keys to this. The first is an
accurate understanding of the role of infrastructure in the run-time environment
at the time solutions are built, and second, is the appropriate use of the run-time
infrastructure to enforce the policies established in the service contract. Unlike the
other timeframes, there is really only one artifact that is used to describe the run-time
behavior, and that is the service contract. Before covering that, let's first look at a
conceptual view of the infrastructure and the guidance that must be given to teams
during their design processes.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 8
[ 191 ]
Policy-Driven Infrastructure
At its core, the run-time infrastructure consists of three things: infrastructure used
to execute the logic associated with the service consumer, infrastructure used to
execute the logic associated with the service provider, and infrastructure used to
allow communication between the two. Earlier, it was stated that a goal should
be to minimize the ways in which a service consumer and a service provider can
communicate. Through the use of reference architectures, the policies are created that
define these standards. With these standards in place, there are three core principles
that should be adopted:
Service consumers are responsible for ensuring that all messages they send
are compliant with the service communication standards.
Service providers are responsible for ensuring that they expose
endpoints that can consume messages that are compliant with the service
communication standards.
The service communication infrastructure will enforce all non-functional
capabilities for all messages that are compliant with the service
communication standards, including mediation between those standards.
This results in a logical picture like this:
Internal Service
Consumers
External Service
Consumers
Compliant Service Messages
Service Communications Infrastructure
Internal Service Providers
Compliant Service Messages
This clearly leads to a simple statement about run-time behavior: all service messages
are compliant with the service communications standards. Unfortunately, that is
seldom the case. If your organization leverages third-party products, it is unlikely
that they will be compliant with all of your standards out-of-the-box. The key
principle to follow, however, is that it is the responsibility of the non-compliant
party to find a way to be in compliance, not the service communications
infrastructure. Previous integration approaches, such as EAI technology, attempted
to allow the endpoints to do whatever they wanted, and mediate between all of this
in the middle. This quickly ran into problems, as precious CPU cycles were spent
doing transformations and other activities to tie systems together which degraded
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Establishing SOA Governance at Your Organization
[ 192 ]
the performance of other transactions that required little in mediation. The right
approach is to push these adapters out to the endpoints, in an approach like this:
Service Communications Infrastructure
Internal Service Providers
Internal Service
Consumer
Adapter
External Service
Consumer
Adapter
Adapter
In this approach, it is the responsibility of the service consumer or service provider to
put an adapter into their processing path prior to sending messages out through the
service communications infrastructure. This can still involve EAI technology, but the
use of that technology only accepts message traffic that is associated with the noncompliant system, versus dealing with all message traffic. These adapters can also be
leveraged in process at the consumer or provider, such as using a third-party SOAP
library within a Java execution environment that doesn't natively provide one.
The final adjustment to this diagram is to understand that the standards may be
significantly different when dealing with an external party, whether that party is a
service consumer or a service provider. This results in the following picture:
Service Communications Infrastructure
Internal Service Providers
Internal Service
Consumer
Optional Adapter
Optional Adapter
External Service
Consumer
Industry Standard
Communications
Corporate Standard
Communications
Corporate Standard
Communications
Corporate Standard
Communications
External Gateway
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 8
[ 193 ]
In this picture, an external service consumer communicates with an external gateway
using industry standard communications technologies, both for the underlying
transport as well as the messaging schemas. It is the responsibility of the external
service consumer to be compliant with these industry standards.
The external gateway is responsible for the initial enforcement of security policies,
as well as any mediation from the industry standards to the internal standards.
Again, this encompasses both transport and messaging schema. If multiple versions
of an industry standard exist, and are supported, the external gateway must be
capable of transforming any of them into the approved internal corporate standards.
If the internal standards are identical to the external standards, clearly this step is
unnecessary. As a result, a best practice is to try to leverage industry standards for
internal message formats as well, although it is recognized that this may require
extending the standard for additional internal information.
Inside the corporate data center, all message traffic through the service
communications infrastructure must be compliant with the corporate standards.
Mediation within the corporate standards is a capability of the service
communications infrastructure. This can include moving a message from an
HTTP transport to a JMS-based transport (if both are allowed), mediating between
POX/HTTP and SOAP/HTTP, and so on. It also includes mediation required for
versioning of those standards. If the schema for an information entity has changed,
but the use of a previous version is still allowed, the infrastructure should handle
transformations between the two, when it is required.
It is the responsibility of the internal service consumer and the internal service
provider to ensure that they are compliant with at least one of the standards for
service communication. The endpoints do not need to support all of them, but they
must support at least one. Where a service consumer or provider is non-compliant,
they are responsible for employing an adapter, whether in process or an external
entity for providing a compliant interface. Clearly, native compliance is preferable, as
this prevents the proliferation of "glue" infrastructure used to tie everything together.
The policies around service communication technologies should be used as part of
your technology evaluation process for third-party packages to prevent this need as
much as possible.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Establishing SOA Governance at Your Organization
[ 194 ]
Service Contracts
With the standards for communication established, the infrastructure can now focus
on the enforcement of the policies within service contracts. Some policies may be
common to all service contracts, consistent with the policies that are in place in the
reference architectures. For example, if the service technology reference architecture
states that only XML payloads are allowed, this should be reflected in all service
contracts. Any service message received by the communications infrastructure that
does not contain an XML payload should be rejected.
While many of these policies can, and should be tested at development time, they
must also be enforced at run-time, whether to deal with unknown bugs in the
consumer or provider, protection against rogue applications that didn't follow
appropriate testing procedures, or in case of external consumers, because we don't
know what testing was performed at development time.
In addition, there are behaviors that cannot be handled by development time testing,
typically associated with SLA enforcement point. A capacity test can be done to
verify that the system behaves properly when 1,000 users of a service consumer
are sending simultaneous requests, but this can't account for a mistake in analysis
of the user base. If the real number is 10,000 users, how do we prevent the system
from being overwhelmed? Each individual message may be fully compliant with all
standards, but it's the fact that a much higher rate of message traffic is occurring that
can create the problem.
The service contract must specify the expected usage by the consumer in an
appropriate level of detail, as well as the expected response time from the provider
when the system is behaving as expected. Additionally, thresholds for both usage by
the consumer and response time from the provider must be established. Exceeding
these thresholds results in notifications, allowing corrective action to be taken before
a problem occurs, or a switch to a mode of self-preservation, where requests will
be rejected in order to protect the back end service implementation from a
complete failure.
The infrastructure must be capable of changing the policies associated with a
contract, or establishing new contracts, without requiring a deployment of a new
version of the service or the consumer solely for that reason. It is common that a
change in contract may accompany an associated functionality change in a service
consumer, service provider, or both, but it is the functionality change that drives the
implementation change and the contract change. We never want a contract change to
require an implementation change.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 8
[ 195 ]
The service contract must also address reporting policies for service usage. The
desired behavior at run-time should never be to deploy a service in production and
then ignore it unless the system tells us otherwise. Usage reports should be provided
to each consumer, as well as to the service provider. Analysis of these reports may
trigger a change in policy, or even a need for a capacity modification, if the reports
indicate the usage characteristics are changing.
Policies for Run-Time Governance
The following are questions or policies that you should consider in your run-time
governance efforts:
What is the normal rate of requests for a given service consumer?
What is the expected response time for the service provider for typical
requests from that service consumer?
What actions are taken when the request rate for a given service consumer
exceeds each of the agreed upon thresholds?
What actions are taken when the response time for a given service consumer
exceeds each of the agreed upon thresholds?
Are there any time restrictions on when a particular consumer can access
a service?
For services with multiple entry points via different technologies (for
example, SOAP/HTTP, XML/HTTP, SOAP/JMS), is policy enforcement
defined and consistent (if needed) for each entry point?
Are all security policies configured and being enforced?
Are service requests routed to the appropriate version for each consumer,
or have appropriate transformations been applied, preserving backward
compatibility?
Are all service messages being logged appropriately per any enterprise
auditing requirements?
Are all service messages being logged and preserved for the purpose
of debugging?
Are usage metrics being properly collected?
Are usage reports being generated and distributed appropriately?
Are the recipients of these reports properly reviewing them and accounting
for any discrepancies in behavior?
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Establishing SOA Governance at Your Organization
[ 196 ]
Are all policies associated with message structure being enforced by the
run-time infrastructure?
Are non-compliant messages being logged, rejected, and reported to
appropriate personnel?
Remember that while the infrastructure can enforce many of the run-time
governance policies, there is still a need to have people involved. If the staff deploys
services into production and then forgets about them, there is significant risk of
problems down the road. The lifecycle of a service consumer and a service provider
must be managed from inception to decommissioning, not just from inception to
production deployment.
SOA Governance Processes
Now that people and policies are in place, the focus turns to process. There are four
major governance processes that need to be addressed:
Establishing Desired Behavior and Policies
Education and Communication
Policy Enforcement
Measurement
PROCESSES
Educate
Measure Enforce
Governing Body
(People)
Create
POLICY
•
•
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 8
[ 197 ]
Establishing Desired Behavior and Policies
While most people immediately think of enforcement when they hear the word
"governance" in the context of software development, this is not where governance
begins. SOA governance begins by establishing the desired behaviors you want to
achieve through your adoption of SOA. If there are no desired behaviors, how will
you know if your SOA efforts are successful? Likewise, if the desired behaviors
cannot be measured, how will you know if your SOA efforts are successful?
"Increasing business agility" is not a behavior that can be easily measured.
"Decreasing the average delivery time for IT solutions by 20%" is a behavior that
can be measured. As you refine your desired behavior, keep in mind that SOA
governance includes pre-project activities, project activities, and run-time activities,
and your desired behavior should reflect all of these. The earlier behavior that
discussed decreasing the average delivery time really only impact project activities.
If there is a need to change the way IT solutions are defined, as was the case for
Advasco, there needs to be a desired behavior that reflects this. Likewise, what is the
driver for policy-driven infrastructure in support of service interactions? This could
be a behavior related to the responsiveness of IT to business change, or it could be a
behavior associated with the up time of the IT systems.
Once the desired behaviors have been established, then the organization can
establish policies that will yield this behavior. In order to establish these policies, the
roles described earlier must be considered, and responsibility given appropriately,
whether that is through a cross-functional Center of Excellence or in a more
decentralized manner where the individuals in those roles work together as needed
to establish enterprise policies for pre-project activities, project activities, and
run-time activities.
The importance of this step cannot be understated. All too often, the people acting
as "governors" are put in place, but the policies (and sometimes even the desired
behavior) are never established. This can result in a dictatorial style, where the
"governed" can only guess what the governors are looking for, and those guesses are
usually wrong. In addition, the outcome is completely dependent on the particular
governor involved. Another potential outcome is where the SOA effort slowly
fades into the background. Some teams may claim they are "doing SOA," but there's
nothing to either support or refute the claim. Over time, people will simply stop
paying attention, since the claim doesn't mean anything.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Establishing SOA Governance at Your Organization
[ 198 ]
Education and Communication
Now that you have your desired behaviors and policies specified, the next process
is still not enforcement, it is education and communication. While the governors
may be aware of the policies, the governed may not be. In order to properly educate
the staff, the people driving your SOA adoption efforts and establishing policy
should also create a formal communication and education plan. The communication
plan should include presentations that appeal to a broad audience, as well as
presentations that are targeted toward particular audiences or toward a smaller
group, such as an individual team. In addition to formal presentations, other
communication techniques should be leveraged including whitepapers, blogs, and
any other communication resources your organization has at its disposal.
Educational courses should be created for any skill sets the organization may lack,
whether that is development technologies, such as Web Services, REST, or XML,
analysis technologies, such as Business Process Modeling, or run-time management
approaches such as ITIL v3 (Information Technology Infrastructure Library).
The people involved with your SOA governance effort must get the word out
through presentations, documents, blogs, and whatever communication resources
your organization has at its disposal. In addition to raising awareness of the effort,
it will also build support for the effort such that people want to participate. People
that may have questions about it will have the opportunity to voice those concerns,
which can either lead to clarification on the reasons behind the policies, or to an
adjustment of the policies. These conversations can be very constructive, because
the policies must be connected to the desired behavior. If the connection between
them is not clear, they should be questioned. If there is disagreement on whether the
policy will lead to the desired behavior, alternative policies can be suggested, either
by the governors or the governed. The one thing that is not questionable, however,
is the desired behavior. For example, there should not be debate around the need to
improve the average delivery time for IT solutions; however, there can be debate on
the specific policies that will lead to that result.
Once again, there are strong parallels between SOA governance and traditional
government. Constituents feel disconnected from their government when there is
insufficient education and communication about the activities of the government.
At its extreme, it can lead to a complete lack of faith in the government, which can
have consequences ranging from revolt to the government becoming irrelevant. The
same holds true for SOA governance. If the people involved in your SOA governance
efforts are not educating and communicating, the people trying to make SOA a
reality may simply ignore them or may be very resistant toward the enforcement
efforts. Education and communication processes are the key to ensuring that
governance is not seen with contempt in your organization, but rather as the key to
enabling change for the better.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 8
[ 199 ]
Policy Enforcement
The next process that must be addressed is the one that most people associate
with governance, and that is policy enforcement. Regardless of how much you've
educated your organization and communicated the desired behavior and policies,
you still need to ensure that you have compliance with those policies, and that
requires enforcement. First and foremost, you must remember the golden rule when
it comes to any enforcement process:
The easiest way to achieve compliance is to make compliance the path of
least resistance.
Education and communication are a big part of this, but there are also many
opportunities beyond this, especially for project governance and run-time
governance. For example, if you have a policy that states that average response time
must be collected for all services, the easiest way to ensure this happens is to make
it a zero-effort activity for the service development team. Their service needs to be
deployed onto an application server in a production environment to be used. If those
application servers already have a service management agent deployed on them, that
agent will recognize the new service and immediately begin collecting metrics and
storing them in the appropriate repository, generating reports, and so on.
There will be policies for which some effort is required, but the burden should be on
the people establishing the policies to ensure that the required effort is as minimal
as possible. In the Advasco story, a policy was established that required service
development teams to seek out potential consumers from outside the project at hand.
If the team has to arrange for meetings with every development manager to discuss
this, clearly, it's not going to happen. The managers will get tired of the meetings,
and the development team will struggle trying to figure out who to talk to, while at
the same time, they will be pressured by the project manager who is wondering what
is taking so long. Instead, if the act of entering a proposed service into the Registry/
Repository kicks off notifications to other development managers, the effort can
be significantly reduced. With appropriate analysis of the business domains and
capabilities, the effort can be reduced even more by only sending notifications to
managers most likely to be interested.
To further emphasize the need for the previous processes, enforcement processes
can be streamlined when the people doing the enforcement are trusted to evaluate
projects on their own. A possible approach recommended earlier was the use of
review boards. Too often, review boards are only used because the policies have
not been formally specified, and a room full of smart people is expected to make
the decisions during the review process. This process is at risk for turning into a
debate over policy between the people performing the review, rather than an effort
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Establishing SOA Governance at Your Organization
[ 200 ]
to review and improve (if necessary) the project under review. By formally stating
policies and educating the project teams with solid communication, the focus can get
back to where it belongs—making the projects better or simply adding them to the
list of compliant efforts and getting out of their way.
Measurement and Improvement
The final process associated with SOA governance is that of measurement and
improvement. While policy enforcement can tell you whether your efforts are
compliant with the policies or not, policy compliance alone will not tell you whether
you're achieving your desired behavior. If you're not, then something needs to
change. Your organization is adopting SOA because something needed to be
improved. Governance guides the organization through that change. If, however,
you don't get there, then something else needs to change, and it could be the
governance itself.
At each step along your SOA journey, you should be measuring whether or not your
SOA governance efforts are achieving the desired outcome. This includes:
Ensuring that policies are established and documented.
Ensuring that education and communication is relevant, understood,
and successful.
Ensuring that policy compliance is on an upward slope toward 100% at the
rate desired.
Ensuring that the measurable desired behaviors are being achieved. You
could have 100% compliance, but still not reach the desired behavior.
If your measurements show a problem, then something needs to change. It can
be a change in process, policy, or people. If the policy compliance rate is low, one
should look at the effectiveness of the communication and education, as well as
make adjustments to how policies are enforced. If policy compliance is high, but the
desired behavior is not achieved, then perhaps additional policies are necessary. If
the effort is in complete disarray, then perhaps new people are needed, or a new
organizational approach, such as switching from an Enterprise Architecture-driven
approach to a Center of Excellence. This cycle of continuous improvement can
also be leveraged by the IT staff itself, to measure the effectiveness of the people
providing SOA governance. If policies are causing undue pain for the staff, there
needs to be a way to bring attention to it, and either lead to a change in policy or a
change in people.
Simply put, if you are not measuring your efforts, there is no way to state whether
your SOA adoption efforts are successful or not.
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 8
[ 201 ]
SOA Governance Technologies
There is no shortage of vendors in the marketplace that are marketing their
technologies as SOA Governance solutions. It is important to know that you can't
buy SOA Governance. What you can buy are solutions that make your governance
processes more efficient, especially when it comes to policy enforcement. In
Chapter 4, we introduced the concept of policy-driven infrastructure, which had the
following key components:
Policy enforcement points
Policy decision points
Policy information points
Policy management points
Technology can help you in all of these domains, whether it is for pre-project
governance, project governance, or run-time governance. The technology solutions
that are available today include:
Service Registry/Repository
Service Testing Platforms
Enterprise Service Bus
XML Appliances
Service Management Platforms
Service Invocation and Exposure Frameworks
Service Registry/Repository
The Service Registry/Repository, in addition to tracking services and consumers,
can assist you in the management and storage of policies associated with your SOA
Governance efforts. It can easily play the role of a policy information point, and some
products can also act as the policy management point. It is even possible to have it
act as a policy decision point, although this is less common.
Being a repository, clearly the most value offered by a service Registry/Repository
is as a policy information point. A core concept of SOA is that of the service contract,
which is a collection of policies that govern a relationship between a consumer and
a provider. These policies should be captured in the service Registry/Repository, as
it needs to capture service consumers, service providers, and most importantly, the
relationship between the two.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Establishing SOA Governance at Your Organization
[ 202 ]
In addition to the policies that govern the interaction between a consumer and a
provider, which are typically more concerned with run-time behavior, the Service
Registry/Repository can also be a point where policies that apply at design time are
captured. For example, a common policy associated with the design of SOAP-based
interfaces is that the interface is compliant with the WS-I Basic Profile. This policy
can be captured in the repository as something that must be enforced on all assets
that have a type of SOAP Service.
For the pre-project governance phase, once again, the service Registry/Repository
can be used to capture services from the moment they are first identified, regardless
of whether any implementation of the service exists or any approved project exists
to build an implementation. The service can simply be given a status of "planned"
or "needed". From that point, new efforts that are seeking funding can take these
services into account as they plan out their high-level architecture. Likewise,
the repository can be a source of project ideas where a strategic service has been
identified and entered into the repository, but no project has been proposed and
approved to create it. These services would be entered into the repository as they are
identified as part of the analysis efforts to define business domain models.
The service Registry/Repository can also be used to determine when the appropriate
time is to decommission a service. By tracking the relationships and versions,
and through integration with a service management platform that can assist in
attaching actual dollar costs, candidates for decommissioning efforts can be more
easily determined.
It is useful to think of the service Registry/Repository as a service lifecycle and
portfolio management tool. From the perspective of the service provider, it is a tool
for tracking each release of the service, the contracts with all of the consumers, as
well as all of the corporate policies that apply to service design efforts. From the
perspective of the service consumer, it's a way to easily find services that may be
appropriate, keep up with the planned roadmap for services in use, and manage
the contracts with each of those services. From the perspective of the enterprise, it
provides a complete view of all of the consumers and services that are available, their
roadmaps, as well as a view of services that haven't yet been created, but have
been identified.
As a lifecycle management tool, the Registry/Repository can also be a trigger for
events that cause policy enforcement as part of project time governance to happen.
For example, when a service interface is defined and stored in the repository, this
should trigger a review of the interface to check for compliance against the enterprise
policies associated with service interface design.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 8
[ 203 ]
The challenge for these tools is that there are very few standards for specifying
policies and for interacting with a Service Registry/Repository. Standards such
as UDDI and ebXML provide some guidance in interacting with the registry, but
each tool is likely to have its own custom information model for how it represents
policies. As a result, any policy enforcement point that wants to leverage a Registry/
Repository as a policy information point will likely require custom integration work.
All in all, the Registry/Repository is really the cornerstone of the infrastructure
associated with SOA Governance. If a Registry/Repository does not exist, the
individual enforcement points must each maintain their own record of the services
involved. This cannot only lead to redundant data stores, but also to gaps in the data
coverage where automated enforcement of policies may not currently exist.
Service Testing Platforms
The next piece of technology is a service testing platform. As the name suggests,
these tools are focused on testing services. They may be sold as an add-on module
or extension of a broader application testing platform, or they may be standalone
solutions focused exclusively on services. In addition to being a tool that can
automate the project-time compliance checks, they can also be a source of many
"out-of-the-box" policies that can be reviewed by the people responsible for
your SOA governance efforts and incorporated into the enterprise policies if
deemed appropriate.
In addition to checking service interfaces for compliance with interface policies,
service testing platforms also play a key role in the definition of service contracts.
A service provider needs to provide baseline performance information for capacity
planning purposes, the baseline's information can be captured consistently for all
services through the use of a standard service testing platform. Furthermore, the
testing platform can also be used to test service consumers and assist in the efforts
to establish thresholds for notification and throttling. Once again, a standard tool
for this purpose can be very advantageous. By preserving test scripts for each
individual service consumer (which, incidentally, can be stored in a service Registry/
Repository), capacity tests can be executed that include background traffic
from other consumers, giving a more accurate picture of the behavior of the
production systems.
As is the case with most of the tools discussed here, integration with a Service
Registry/Repository is an important factor to consider. In order to automate
enforcement of service interface policies, the Registry/Repository must be capable of
kicking off compliance tests executed by the testing platform automatically kick of
compliance checks against documented policies in at the time an interface definition
is stored in the repository.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Establishing SOA Governance at Your Organization
[ 204 ]
Enterprise Service Bus
The enterprise service bus, as discussed in Chapter 4, is primarily a policy
enforcement point. All service traffic is intended to flow through the bus, making it
an excellent place to enforce the policies associated with a service contract. An ESB
can also be used to enforce some amount of project-time policies, simply because
the ESB must be made aware of the service interface in order to make it available to
service consumers. Normally, however, this takes place too late in the development
process to be practical.
When evaluating enterprise service bus products, be sure to evaluate them from
the perspective of policy enforcement points and service contracts. The product
should provide a contextual model that easily allows the configuration of policies
for the enforcement of service contracts. In utilizing an ESB, one must also be
cautious to define your policies for run-time service interaction first, and then
use the ESB to enforce them, rather than opening up the full range of capabilities
of the ESB as the default policies for communication. Some ESB products have
backgrounds in EAI technologies, and as a result, can still promote and integrate
anything-to-anything mentality, which will not achieve any goals of reduced
complexity in your environment.
XML Appliances and Security Gateways
XML appliances, also discussed in Chapter 4, are also policy enforcement points
for run-time SOA governance. A difference between ESB products and XML
appliances is that many ESB products tend to operate more like traditional software
middleware. In fact, many ESB products have roots in EAI middleware technology.
XML appliances, on the other hand, tend to have an operational model more similar
to a network appliance than traditional middleware. Just as was recommended with
ESBs, when evaluating these products, keep in mind the policy-driven mantra of
configure, not code. Look closely at the contextual model of the appliance and how
well it allows for the configuration of policies for the enforcement of service contracts
between a service consumer and a service provider.
There is one additional differentiator between most of the XML appliances and the
ESB products, and that is in the realm of security. At least two of the major XML
appliances available took a path of supporting accelerated XSL transformation first,
XML security second, and then full service intermediation third. As a result, the
security features tend to be far more robust in the appliances, primarily in the area
of threat protection. Threat protection is not normally something associated with a
particular service consumer; rather, it is a set of policies that apply to all services,
scanning all requests for malicious content, such as SQL injection. There are some
consumer-specific policies that this enhanced scanning capabilities can enforce,
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 8
[ 205 ]
however, such as a restriction on the size of the message. Two consumers using the
same service could easily have very different characteristics in the message sizes. For
example, in an ordering service, a key strategic partner may always have many line
items per order, thereby increasing the size of a typical message from them, while a
smaller partner may typically have one or two line items per order. Most appliances
can handle policies on message size quite easily.
For both ESBs and XML appliances, a limitation is in the management capabilities.
They typically have some elementary management capabilities, but if you require
sophisticated management of the run-time behavior where complicated analytics are
performed and then fed back into the enforcement points for SLA enforcement, you
may need to look at the next type of product, a service management platform.
Service Management Platforms
Service management platforms, like both ESBs and XML appliances, are involved
in run-time SOA governance, providing very similar coverage. These products may
have fewer supported transport options than an ESB and fewer security capabilities
than an XML appliance, but they typically provide more sophisticated management
capabilities. Where ESBs and XML appliances can monitor and collect metrics, they
typically only make these measurements available to some other analytics engine
and/or dashboard. Service management platforms, however, include the analytics
engine and dashboard. This analytic capability can allow the service management
platform to inspect messages and track key metrics on a per service level, a per
consumer level, per service broken down by consumer, and many other ways.
It will also look at metrics from all monitoring points, so if you have a load balanced
or clustered environment, you can see the rate of requests across all collection
points, rather than seeing the rate of requests at one particular collection point.
When enforcing the policies in a run-time service contract, this is an
important consideration.
Furthermore, most service management products include both agents and gateways,
which create additional flexibility in deployment. For example, most service
management platforms include agents for ESBs; some even can work with certain
XML appliances. Therefore, it is possible to use all three, leveraging ESBs where
a large number of transports need to be supported and XML appliances at the
perimeter for enhanced security, while deploying agents from a service management
platform on both of them.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Establishing SOA Governance at Your Organization
[ 206 ]
Service Invocation and Exposure Frameworks
Service invocation and exposure frameworks are a key part of the policy
enforcement mechanism that may be overlooked. When Microsoft finally made
a statement regarding products in the ESB space in 2005, they stated that the two
key components of their solution were BizTalk and Windows Communication
Foundation (WCF). WCF is a framework for both invoking services and exposing
logic as services. The biggest benefit of frameworks in the SOA governance space
is that by using them, compliance with certain policies should be automatic. For
example, if your organization has a policy on how identity should be represented on
service messages, a framework can easily extract identity from the current consumer,
format it in the appropriate way, and place it on the outgoing message. Depending
on the framework involved, this may only involve a code annotation, a few lines of
code, or perhaps nothing at all from the developer writing the service consumer. This
certainly makes compliance the path of least resistance.
Summary
SOA Governance is a critical part of the SOA adoption effort. It begins with a
concrete definition of what your organization hopes to achieve by adopting SOA,
and then sets in place the people who will make the policy decisions that through
effective processes, guide your organization to that desired outcome.
There is no one universal approach to SOA governance that works at all
organizations, rather, the organization must take into account their own business
structure, organizational model, and corporate culture in determining the
appropriate way to drive SOA adoption, whether through Enterprise Architecture, a
cross-functional Center of Excellence, or by simply relying on the organization as is
to modify their individual behaviors to reach the goals desired.
The policy makers must address the desired behavior of the organization in defining
and choosing what projects to execute, known as pre-project governance, the desired
behavior of the project teams that are building the services and their consumers,
known as project governance, and the desired behavior of those services, consumers,
and the people that manage them at run-time as they execute in production.
However, stating policies are not enough. The organization must be educated on
the desired behavior and the policies that will guide you there, and some amount of
enforcement must be put in place to achieve compliance with those policies. Whether
it is pre-project, project, or run-time governance, there are many technologies
that can increase the efficiency of your compliance processes, whether through
automated compliance checks, frameworks that guarantee compliance when used,
or by simply raising the awareness through easy access to information about services
and their consumers.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Chapter 8
[ 207 ]
Ultimately, governance can only be effective if the organization puts measurements
in place to judge whether or not the desired behavior is being achieved. Measuring
compliance with policies is easy to capture, but if the wrong policies are put in place,
the desired behavior will not be achieved. Governance is first and foremost about
achieving the desired behavior. If policy compliance does not yield the desired
behavior, then the policies may need to be changed.
As your organization proceeds along its SOA journey, the effectiveness of your
governance processes can make or break your efforts. With good governance you
can make your SOA efforts, and ultimately your business more successful, whether
that represents some small changes in an organization that already works very well
with its IT department, or a more fundamental change in the way the IT department
works with the rest of the organization.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Cast of Characters
The following is a list of characters, in alphabetical order, that appear in the Advasco
story, their role, and the chapters in which they appear.
Name Role(s) Chapters
Adil IT Manager for Home Insurance Systems 2, 3
Alan Project Manager, Brokerage Systems 5
Alex Linux Operations Technician 6
Alexandra Spencer's wife 2, 3
Andrea CIO 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
Beth Project Manager for Facilities Management 3, 7
Craig Technical Lead, Customer Information Service 4
Ed Analyst, Customer Information Service 6
Elena Chief Architect 2, 3, 4, 5, 7
Greg Member of Enterprise Architecture Team 3
Jared Lead Analyst for Brokerage Services, Member of SOA Center
of Excellence
3, 5, 6, 7
Jason IT Manager for Auto Insurance Systems 4
Jennifer Project Manager for Auto Insurance Systems 2
Jim Project Manager for Pre-Qualification
Service Manager for Portfolio Management Service
3, 5, 7
John Member of IT Governance Board from outside of IT 5
Maria Project Manager for Account Maintenance, Service Manager for
Customer Information Service
3, 4, 5, 6, 7
Mark Project Manager for Home Insurance Systems
Service Manager for Customer Information Service
2, 5
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Cast of Characters
[ 210 ]
Name Role(s) Chapters
Mike IT Manager for Insurance Products 2
Mitch Project Manager for Auto Insurance Systems 3
Paul IT Manager for Home Insurance Systems 4
Raj Technical Lead, Member of SOA Center of Excellence 3, 6, 7
Ramesh Solution Architect for Annuity Systems 2, 4, 7
Ron Member of SOA Center of Excellence 4
Ryan Project Manager for Annuity Systems 2
Sarah Middleware Operations Technician 6
Spencer Member of Enterprise Architecture Team
Member of SOA Center of Excellence
2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7
Tim IT Manager for Auto Insurance Systems 2
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Index
A
analysis, SOA
about 109, 119
business capability, analysis 118, 119
business capability, mapping 112-117
business process analysis 110-112
B
behavior, changing
about 158
governance, changing 160
governance risk 159, 160
BPM 110
BPMN 111
business capability, analysis 118, 119
business capability, mapping 112-117
Business Process Management. See BPM
Business Process Modeling Notation.
See BPMN
C
case study, Advasco
characters 209, 210
partner servicess 123-133
services, building 99-109
SOA governance 19-28, 71-82
SOA success 151-158
checkpoints, enterprise SOA governance
about 63, 64
analysis checkpoint 64
architecture checkpoint 64, 65
design checkpoint 65
implementation checkpoint 66
operational readiness checkpoint 66, 67
D
Database Analysts (DBAs) 60
E
enterprise SOA governance
about 55
checkpoints 63, 64
design-time checkpoints 63, 64
goals, establishing 55-57
roles 57, 58
service portfolio management 67
G
governance. See also SOA governance
about 5, 6
desired behavior 6
IT governance committee 6
people 6, 7
policies 7
process 8
governance, changing 160
I
IT governance
about 10
corporate governance 10
Sarbanes-Oxley Act 10
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
[ 212 ]
J
JBOS (Just a Bunch of Services) 29
K
key project roles, SOA journey 29
M
management 95
marketing 95
monitoring 94, 95
O
operational readiness checkpoint 66, 67
P
partner services, case study 123-133
people, SOA governance
about 164
business analyst 165
enterprise architect/technology architect
166, 167
information architect 167
IT manager 168
organizing 171
other stakeholders 171
platform manager 169, 171
security architect 168
service manager/owner 169
solution architect 165
technical lead/domain architect 166
people organizing, SOA governance
about 171
center of excellence 173, 174
challenges 175, 176
competency center 173, 174
enterprise architecture driven 172, 173
review boards 175
PMOs 10
policies, SOA governance
about 177
pre-project governance 177-180
pre-project governance, artifacts 177-179
project governance 180, 189, 190
project governance, artifacts 181
run-time governance 190, 195, 196
policy-driven infrastructure, service
versioning policies
components 85
conceptual view 92
Enterprise Service Bus (ESB) 89, 90
exposure framework 91, 92
policy, applying 88, 89
policy enforcement point 86
policy information point 86
policy infrastructure point 86
policy management point 85
service invocation 91, 92
service management platforms 90, 91
XML appliances 90
Portfolio Management Organizations.
See PMOs
pre-project governance, artifacts 177
application portfolio 179
business domain/capability models 179
business process models 179
organization chart 178
service portfolio 179
project governance, artifacts
service blueprints 187
service frameworks 187
service security reference architecture
185-187
service technology reference architecture
181
service technology reference architecture,
policies 184
service types 182
service types, mapping to technologies 183
standard information models 188, 189
project inception checkpoint 119, 120
R
Representational State Transfer.
See REST
REST 43
roles, enterprise SOA governance
about 57, 58
analysts 59
business management 59
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
[ 213 ]
center of excellence 60, 61
Database Analysts (DBAs) 60
developers 59
engagement model 61, 63
enterprise architecture 58
information architecture 58
IT management 59
run-time environment, SOA governance
consistent performance, ensuring 134
consumer starvation, preventing 137-139
metric collection 134-137
problems, detecting 143
problems detecting, predictive analysis
used 144, 145
problems detecting, synthetic transitions
used 143, 144
run-time usage, managing 142, 143
service consumer baselines, defining
139, 140
service management, technologies 145-148
service provider baselines, defining
140, 142
run-time governance
policies 195, 196
policy-driven infrastructure 191-193
service contracts 194
S
SAML 37
Sarbanes-Oxley Act 10
Security Assertion Markup Language.
See SAML
service consumer
baselines, defining 139, 140
policies 138
service interface specification
about 37-40
canonical model, using 40-42
POX over HTTP 42
WSDL file 42
service lifecycle management
about 92, 93
management, second M 95
marketing, third M 95
monitoring, first M 94, 95
Service Oriented Modeling and
Architecture. See SOMA
service portfolio management, enterprise
SOA governance
service registry/repository 67-69
service provider
about 138, 139
baselines, defining 140, 141
service registry/repository 201, 202
service versioning
policies 82
service versioning policies
about 82
explicit versioning 83, 85
implicit versioning 83, 85
policy-driven infrastructure,
components 85
service contract, extending 85
SOA
about 10, 11
analysis 109, 110
IT services 11-14
SOA governance
about 14
case study 19-28, 71-82
changing over time 160
partner services, case study 123-133
partner services, preparing for 123
people 15, 16, 164
policies 16, 177
process 16
processes 196
run-time environment 133
services building, case study 99-109
technologies 201
SOA governance, key policy areas
service communication technologies 36, 37
service implementation technologies 34
service interface specification 37
SOA governance, processes
about 196
desired behavior and policies,
establishing 197
education and communication 198
measurement and improvement 200
policy enforcement 199, 200
SOA governance, technologies
about 201
enterprise service bus 204
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
[ 214 ]
exposure frameworks 206
security gateways 204
service invocation 206
service management platforms 205
service registry/repository 201, 202
service testing platforms 203
XML appliances 204
SOA journey
beginning 29
key project roles 29
service communication, technologies 36, 37
service contract 30-32
service implementation, technologies 34-36
service interface specification 37
SOA, adding to traditional project
governance 33, 34
SOA success, case study 151-158
SOMA 118
T
technologies, service communication 36, 37
technologies, service implementation 34
W
WCF 206
Web Services Description Language.
See WSDL
Web Services Description Language file.
See WSDL file
Web Services Interoperability. See WS-I
Windows Communication Foundation.
See WCF
WS-I 37
WSDL 91
WSDL file 42
X
XML appliances 90
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Thank you for buying
SOA Governance
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective
MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing
highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books
give you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using
to get the job done. Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have
seen in the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information,
giving you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality,
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike. For
more information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals
should be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you
would like to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our
commissioning editors will get in touch with you.
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some
additional reward for your expertise.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
SOA Approach to Integration
ISBN: 978-1-904811-17-6 Paperback: 300 pages
XML, Web services, ESB, and BPEL in real-world
SOA projects
1. Service-Oriented Architectures and SOA
approach to integration
2. SOA architectural design and
domain-specific models
3. Common Integration Patterns and how they
can be best solved using Web services, BPEL
and Enterprise Service Bus (ESB)
4. Concepts behind SOA standards, security,
transactions, and how to efficiently work
with XML
Service Oriented Java Business
Integration
ISBN: 978-1-847194-40-4 Paperback: 414 pages
Enterprise Service Bus integration solutions for Java
developers
1. Vendor-independent integration of components
and services through JBI explained with realworld examples
2. Hands-on guidance to ESB-based Integration of
loosely coupled, pluggable services
3. Enterprise Integration Patterns (EIP) in action,
in code
4. ESB integration solutions using Apache opensource tools
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles
[ 216 ]
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
Business Process Driven SOA
using BPMN and BPEL
ISBN: 978-1-847191-46-5 Paperback: 328 pages
From Business Process Modeling to Orchestration
and Service Oriented Architecture
1. Understand business process management and
how it relates to SOA
2. Understand advanced business process
modeling and management with BPMN
and BPEL
3. Work with tools that support BPMN and BPEL
(Oracle BPA Suite)
4. Transform BPMN to BPEL and execute
business processes on the SOA platform
5. A complete business process management
life-cycle
SOA and WS-BPEL
ISBN: 978-1-847192-70-7 Paperback: 250 pages
Composing Service-Oriented Architecture Solutions
with PHP and Open-Source ActiveBPEL
1. Build Web Services with PHP
2. Combine PHP Web Services into orchestrations
with WS-BPEL
3. Use better WS-BPEL to enable parallel
processing and asynchronous communication
4. Simplify WS-BPEL development with free
graphical tool ActiveBPEL Designer
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles
[ 217 ]
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/18/2026 9:02:58 PM UTC via HGSKOLAN VST (UNIVERSITY WEST). All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.